    CHAPTER   The Da Vinci Code  Dan Brown Prologue  Louvre Museum, Paris 10:46 P.M.  Renowned curator Jacques Sauniere staggered through the vaulted archway of Louvre Museum's Grand Gallery. Renowned curator Jacques Sauniere lunged for the nearest painting he could see, a Caravaggio. Grabbing the gilded frame, Renowned curator Jacques Sauniere heaved the nearest painting he could see, a Caravaggio toward Renowned curator Jacques Sauniere until the nearest painting he could see, a Caravaggio tore from the wall and Renowned curator Jacques Sauniere collapsed backward in a heap beneath the canvas.  As Renowned curator Jacques Sauniere had anticipated, a thundering iron gate fell nearby, barricading the entrance to the suite. The parquet floor shook. Far off, an alarm began to ring.  Renowned curator Jacques Sauniere lay a moment, gasping for breath, taking stock. / am still alive. Renowned curator Jacques Sauniere crawled out from under the canvas and scanned the cavernous space for someplace to hide.  A voice spoke, chillingly close. "Do not move."  On Renowned curator Jacques Sauniere's hands and knees, Renowned curator Jacques Sauniere froze, turning Renowned curator Jacques Sauniere's head slowly.  Only fifteen feet away, outside a thundering iron gate, the mountainous silhouette of Renowned curator Jacques Sauniere's attacker stared through the iron bars. his attacker was broad and tall, with ghost-pale skin and thinning white hair. his attacker's irises were pink with dark red pupils. his attacker drew a pistol from his attacker's coat and aimed a pistol through the iron bars, directly at Renowned curator Jacques Sauniere. "Renowned curator Jacques Sauniere should not have run." his attacker's accent was not easy to place. "Now tell his attacker where it is."  "Renowned curator Jacques Sauniere told his attacker already," Renowned curator Jacques Sauniere stammered, kneeling defenseless on the floor of the museum's Grand Gallery. "Renowned curator Jacques Sauniere have no idea what his attacker are talking about!"  "Renowned curator Jacques Sauniere are lying." his attacker stared at Renowned curator Jacques Sauniere, perfectly immobile except for the glint in his attacker's ghostly eyes. "Renowned curator Jacques Sauniere and Renowned curator Jacques Sauniere's brethren possess it's."  Renowned curator Jacques Sauniere felt a surge of adrenaline. How could his attacker possibly know possess?  "Tonight the rightful guardians will be restored. Tell his attacker where it is hidden, and Renowned curator Jacques Sauniere will live." his attacker leveled a pistol at Renowned curator Jacques Sauniere's head. "Is it a secret Renowned curator Jacques Sauniere will die for?"  Renowned curator Jacques Sauniere could not breathe.  his attacker tilted his attacker's head, peering down a pistola pistol.  Renowned curator Jacques Sauniere held up Renowned curator Jacques Sauniere's hands in defense. "Wait," Renowned curator Jacques Sauniere said slowly. "Renowned curator Jacques Sauniere will tell his attacker what his attacker need to know." Renowned curator Jacques Sauniere spoke Renowned curator Jacques Sauniere's next words carefully. The lie Renowned curator Jacques Sauniere told was one Renowned curator Jacques Sauniere had rehearsed many times... each time praying Renowned curator Jacques Sauniere would never have to use a pistol.  When Renowned curator Jacques Sauniere had finished speaking, his attacker smiled smugly. "Yes. This is exactly what the others told his attacker."  Renowned curator Jacques Sauniere recoiled. the others  "his attacker found the others, too," his attacker taunted. "the others. the others confirmed what Renowned curator Jacques Sauniere have just said."  It cannot be! Renowned curator Jacques Sauniere's true identity, along with the identities of Renowned curator Jacques Sauniere's three senechaux, was almost as sacred as the ancient secret his three senechaux protected. Renowned curator Jacques Sauniere now realized his three senechaux, following strict procedure, had told the same lie before his three senechaux's own deaths. told was part of the protocol.  his attacker aimed a pistol again. "When Renowned curator Jacques Sauniere are gone, his attacker will be the only one who knows the truth."  the truth In an instant, Renowned curator Jacques Sauniere grasped the true horror of the situation. If Renowned curator Jacques Sauniere die, the truth will be lost forever. Instinctively, Renowned curator Jacques Sauniere tried to scramble for cover.  a pistol roared, and Renowned curator Jacques Sauniere felt a searing heat as the bullet lodged in Renowned curator Jacques Sauniere's stomach. Renowned curator Jacques Sauniere fell forward... struggling against the pain. Slowly, Renowned curator Jacques Sauniere rolled over and stared back through the iron bars at his attacker.  his attacker was now taking dead aim at his head.  Renowned curator Jacques Sauniere closed Renowned curator Jacques Sauniere's eyes, Renowned curator Jacques Sauniere's thoughts a swirling tempest of fear and regret.  The click of an empty chamber echoed through the corridor.  his eyes flew open.  his attacker glanced down at a pistol, looking almost amused. his attacker reached for a second clip, but then seemed to reconsider, smirking calmly at Renowned curator Jacques Sauniere's gut. "his attacker's work here is done."  Renowned curator Jacques Sauniere looked down and saw the bullet hole in Renowned curator Jacques Sauniere's white linen shirt. the bullet hole in his white linen shirt was framed by a small circle of blood a few inches below Renowned curator Jacques Sauniere's breastbone. his stomach Almost cruelly, the bullet had missed Renowned curator Jacques Sauniere's heart. As a veteran of la Guerre d'Algerie, Renowned curator Jacques Sauniere had witnessed this horribly drawn- out death before. For fifteen minutes, Renowned curator Jacques Sauniere would survive as Renowned curator Jacques Sauniere's stomach acids seeped into Renowned curator Jacques Sauniere's chest cavity, slowly poisoning Renowned curator Jacques Sauniere from within.  "Pain is good, Renowned curator Jacques Sauniere," his attacker said.  Then his attacker was gone.  Alone now, Renowned curator Jacques Sauniere turned Renowned curator Jacques Sauniere's gaze again to a thundering iron gate. Renowned curator Jacques Sauniere was trapped, and the doors could not be reopened for at least twenty minutes. By the time anyone got to Renowned curator Jacques Sauniere, Renowned curator Jacques Sauniere would be dead. Even so, the fear that now gripped Renowned curator Jacques Sauniere was a fear far greater than that of Renowned curator Jacques Sauniere's own death.  / must pass on the secret.  Staggering to Renowned curator Jacques Sauniere's feet, Renowned curator Jacques Sauniere pictured Renowned curator Jacques Sauniere's three murdered brethren. Renowned curator Jacques Sauniere thought of the generations who had come before his three murdered brethren... of the mission with which his three murdered brethren had all been entrusted.  An unbroken chain of knowledge.  Suddenly, now, despite all the precautions... despite all the fail-safes... Renowned curator Jacques Sauniere was the only remaining link, the sole guardian of the secret.  Shivering, Renowned curator Jacques Sauniere pulled Renowned curator Jacques Sauniere to Renowned curator Jacques Sauniere's feet.  / must find some way....  Renowned curator Jacques Sauniere was trapped inside the museum's Grand Gallery, and there existed only one person on earth to whom Renowned curator Jacques Sauniere could pass the torch. Renowned curator Jacques Sauniere gazed up at the walls of the museum's Grand Gallery. A collection of the world's most famous paintings seemed to smile down on Renowned curator Jacques Sauniere like old friends.  Wincing in pain, Renowned curator Jacques Sauniere summoned all of Renowned curator Jacques Sauniere's faculties and strength. The desperate task before Renowned curator Jacques Sauniere, Renowned curator Jacques Sauniere knew, would require every remaining second of Renowned curator Jacques Sauniere's life.     CHAPTER    1  Robert Langdon awoke slowly.  A telephone was ringing in the darkness - A telephone. Robert Langdon fumbled for the bedside lamp and turned the bedside lamp on. Squinting at Robert Langdon's surroundings Robert Langdon saw a plush Renaissance bedroom with Louis XVI furniture, hand-frescoed walls, and a colossal mahogany four-poster bed.  Where the hell am Robert Langdon?  The jacquard bathrobe hanging on Robert Langdon's bedpost bore the monogram: HOTEL RITZ PARIS.  Slowly, the fog began to lift.  Robert Langdon picked up A telephone. "Hello?"  "Robert Langdon?" a man's voice said. "a man's hope a man's have not awoken Robert Langdon?"  Dazed, Robert Langdon looked at the bedside clock. It was 12:32 A.M. Robert Langdon had been asleep only an hour, but Robert Langdon felt like the dead.  "a man's is the concierge, Robert Langdon. a man's apologize for this intrusion, but Robert Langdon have a visitor. a visitor insists it is urgent."  Robert Langdon still felt fuzzy. A visitor? Robert Langdon's eyes focused now on a crumpled flyer on Robert Langdon's bedside table.  THE AMERICAN UNIVERSITY OF PARIS  proudly presents  AN EVENING WITH ROBERT LANGDON  PROFESSOR OF RELIGIOUS SYMBOLOGY,  HARVARD UNIVERSITY Robert Langdon groaned. Tonight's lecture - a slide show about pagan symbolism hidden in the stones of Chartres Cathedral - had probably ruffled some conservative feathers in the audience. Most likely, some religious scholar had trailed Robert Langdon home to pick a fight.  "Robert Langdon'm sorry," Robert Langdon said, "but Robert Langdon'm very tired and - "  "Robert Langdon, Robert Langdon, " a man's pressed, lowering a man's's voice to an urgent whisper. "a visitor is an important man."  Robert Langdon had little doubt. Robert Langdon's books on religious paintings and cult symbology had made Robert Langdon a reluctant celebrity in the art world, and last year Robert Langdon's visibility had increased a hundredfold after Robert Langdon's involvement in a widely publicized incident at the Vatican. Since then, the stream of self- important historians and art buffs arriving at Robert Langdon's door had seemed never-ending.  "If a man's would be so kind," Robert Langdon said, doing Robert Langdon's best to remain polite, "could a man's take a visitor's name and number, and tell a visitor Robert Langdon'll try to call a visitor before Robert Langdon leave Paris on Tuesday? Thank a man's." Robert Langdon hung up before a man's could protest.  Sitting up now, Robert Langdon frowned at Robert Langdon's bedside Guest Relations Handbook, whose cover boasted: SLEEP LIKE A BABY IN THE CITY OF LIGHTS. SLUMBER AT HOTEL RITZ PARIS. Robert Langdon turned and gazed tiredly into the full-length mirror across the room. Robert Langdon Robert Langdon was a stranger - tousled and weary.  Robert Langdon need a vacation, Robert Langdon.  The past year had taken a heavy toll on Robert Langdon, but Robert Langdon didn't appreciate seeing proof in the full-length mirror across the room. Robert Langdon's usually sharp blue eyes looked hazy and drawn Tonight's. A dark stubble was shrouding Robert Langdon's strong jaw and dimpled chin. Around Robert Langdon's temples, the gray highlights were advancing, making the gray highlights's way deeper into Robert Langdon's thicket of coarse black hair. Although Robert Langdon's female colleagues insisted the gray highlights only accentuated Robert Langdon's bookish appeal, Robert Langdon knew better.  //"Boston Magazine could see Robert Langdon now.  Last month, much to Robert Langdon's embarrassment, //"Boston Magazine had listed Robert Langdon as one of that city's top ten most intriguing people - a dubious honor that made Robert Langdon the brunt of endless ribbing by Robert Langdon's HARVARD UNIVERSITY colleagues. Tonight, three thousand miles from home, listed had resurfaced to haunt Robert Langdon at the lecture Robert Langdon had given.  "Ladies and gentlemen..." the hostess had announced to a full house at the American University of Paris's Pavilion Dauphine, "Robert Langdon needs no introduction. Robert Langdon is the author of numerous books: The Symbology of Secret Sects, The An of the Illuminati, The Lost Language of Ideograms, and when the hostess say Robert Langdon wrote the book on Religious Iconology, the hostess mean that quite literally. Many of you use Robert Langdon's textbooks in class."  The students in a full house at the American University of Paris's Pavilion Dauphine nodded enthusiastically. "the hostess had planned to introduce Robert Langdon Tonight's by sharing Robert Langdon's impressive curriculum vitae. However..." the hostess glanced playfully at Robert Langdon. "An audience member has just handed the hostess a far more, shall we say... intriguing introduction."  the hostess held up a copy of //"Boston Magazine.  Robert Langdon cringed. Where the hell did the hostess get a copy of Boston Magazine?  the hostess began reading choice excerpts from the inane article, and Robert Langdon felt Robert Langdon sinking lower and lower in Robert Langdon's chair. Thirty seconds later, a full house at the American University of Paris's Pavilion Dauphine was grinning, and the hostess showed no signs of letting up. "And Robert Langdon's refusal to speak publicly about Robert Langdon's unusual role in last year's Vatican conclave certainly wins Robert Langdon points on //"Boston Magazine's intrigue-o-meter." the hostess goaded a full house at the American University of Paris's Pavilion Dauphine. "Would a full house at the American University of Paris's Pavilion Dauphine like to hear more?"  a full house at the American University of Paris's Pavilion Dauphine applauded.  Somebody stop the hostess, Robert Langdon pleaded as the hostess dove into the inane article again.  "Although Robert Langdon might not be considered hunk-handsome like some of our younger awardees, Robert Langdon has more than Robert Langdon's share of scholarly allure. Robert Langdon's captivating presence is punctuated by an unusually low, baritone speaking voice, which Robert Langdon's female students describe as 'chocolate for the ears.' "  The hall erupted in laughter.  Robert Langdon forced an awkward smile. Robert Langdon knew what came next - some ridiculous line about "Harrison Ford in Harris tweed" - and because this evening Robert Langdon had figured it was finally safe again to wear Robert Langdon's Harris tweed and Burberry turtleneck, Robert Langdon decided to take action.  "Thank the hostess, the hostess," Robert Langdon said, standing prematurely and edging the hostess away from the podium. "//"Boston Magazine clearly has a gift for fiction." Robert Langdon turned to a full house at the American University of Paris's Pavilion Dauphine with an embarrassed sigh. "And if Robert Langdon find which one of a full house at the American University of Paris's Pavilion Dauphine provided the inane article, Robert Langdon'll have the consulate deport a full house at the American University of Paris's Pavilion Dauphine."  a full house at the American University of Paris's Pavilion Dauphine laughed.  "Well, a full house at the American University of Paris's Pavilion Dauphine, as a full house at the American University of Paris's Pavilion Dauphine know, Robert Langdon'm here Tonight's to talk about the power of symbols..." The ringing of Robert Langdon's hotel phone once again broke the silence. Groaning in disbelief, Robert Langdon picked up. "Yes?"  As expected, it was a man's. "Robert Langdon, again a man's's apologies. a man's am calling to inform Robert Langdon that a visitor is now en route to Robert Langdon's room. a man's thought a man's should alert Robert Langdon."  Robert Langdon was wide awake now. "a man's sent someone to your room?"  "a man's apologize, Robert Langdon, but a man like a visitor... a man's cannot presume the authority to stop a visitor."  "Who exactly is a visitor?"  But a man's was gone.  Almost immediately, a heavy fist pounded on Robert Langdon's door.  Uncertain, Robert Langdon slid off the bed, feeling Robert Langdon's toes sink deep into the savonniere carpet. Robert Langdon donned the hotel bathrobe and moved toward Langdon's door. "Who is it?"  "Robert Langdon? a man's need to speak with Robert Langdon." a man's's English was accented - a sharp, authoritative bark. "a man's's name is Lieutenant Jerome Collet. Direction Centrale Police Judiciaire."  Robert Langdon paused. The Judicial Police? Direction Centrale Police Judiciaire was the rough equivalent of the U.S. FBI.  Leaving the security chain in place, Robert Langdon opened Langdon's door a few inches. The face staring back at Robert Langdon was thin and washed out. a man's was exceptionally lean, dressed in an official-looking blue uniform.  "May a man's come in?" a man's asked.  Robert Langdon hesitated, feeling uncertain as a man's's sallow eyes studied Robert Langdon. "What is this all about?"  "a man's's capitaine requires Robert Langdon's expertise in a private matter."  "Now?" Robert Langdon managed. "It's after midnight."  "Am a man's correct that Robert Langdon were scheduled to meet with the curator of the Louvre this evening?"  Robert Langdon felt a sudden surge of uneasiness. Robert Langdon and the curator of the Louvre had been slated to meet for drinks after the lecture he had given Tonight's, but the curator of the Louvre had never shown up. "Yes. How did a man's know shown?"  "We found Robert Langdon's name in the curator of the Louvre's daily planner." "Robert Langdon trust nothing is wrong?"  a man's gave a dire sigh and slid a Polaroid snapshot through the narrow opening in Langdon's door.  When Robert Langdon saw a Polaroid snapshot, Robert Langdon's entire body went rigid.  "a Polaroid snapshot was taken less than an hour ago. Inside the Louvre."  As Robert Langdon stared at a Polaroid snapshot, Robert Langdon's initial revulsion and shock gave way to a sudden upwelling of anger. "Who would do this!"  "We had hoped that Robert Langdon might help We answer that very question, considering Robert Langdon's knowledge in symbology and Robert Langdon's plans to meet with the curator of the Louvre."  Robert Langdon stared at a Polaroid snapshot, Robert Langdon's horror now laced with fear. a Polaroid snapshot was gruesome and profoundly strange, bringing with a Polaroid snapshot an unsettling sense of deja vu. A little over a year ago, Robert Langdon had received a photograph of a corpse and a similar request for help. Twenty-four hours later, the curator of the Louvre had almost lost the curator of the Louvre's life inside the Vatican. a Polaroid snapshot was entirely different, and yet something about the scenario felt disquietingly familiar.  a man's checked a man's's watch. "My capitaine is waiting, Robert Langdon."  Robert Langdon barely heard a man's. Robert Langdon's eyes were still riveted on a Polaroid snapshot. "This symbol here, and the way the curator of the Louvre's body is so oddly..."  "Positioned?" a man's offered.  Robert Langdon nodded, feeling a chill as Robert Langdon looked up. "Robert Langdon can't imagine who would do this to someone."  a man's looked grim. "Robert Langdon don't understand, Robert Langdon. What Robert Langdon see in a Polaroid snapshot..." a man's paused. "the curator of the Louvre did this to the curator of the Louvre."     CHAPTER    2  One mile away, the hulking albino named Silas limped through the front gate of the luxurious brownstone residence on Rue La Bruyere. The spiked cilice belt that the hulking albino named Silas wore around the hulking albino named Silas's thigh cut into the hulking albino named Silas's flesh, and yet the hulking albino named Silas's soul sang with satisfaction of service to the Lord.  Pain is good. the hulking albino named Silas's red eyes scanned the lobby as the hulking albino named Silas entered the luxurious brownstone residence on Rue La Bruyere. Empty. the hulking albino named Silas climbed the stairs quietly, not wanting to awaken any of the hulking albino named Silas's fellow numeraries. the hulking albino named Silas's bedroom door was open; locks were forbidden here. the hulking albino named Silas entered, closing His bedroom door behind the hulking albino named Silas.  His bedroom door was spartan - hardwood floors, a pine dresser, a canvas mat in the corner that served as the hulking albino named Silas's bed. the hulking albino named Silas was a visitor here this week, and yet for many years the hulking albino named Silas had been blessed with a similar sanctuary in New York City.  the Lord has provided the hulking albino named Silas shelter and purpose in the hulking albino named Silas's life.  Tonight, at last, the hulking albino named Silas felt the hulking albino named Silas had begun to repay the hulking albino named Silas's debt. Hurrying to a pine dresser, the hulking albino named Silas found the cell phone hidden in the hulking albino named Silas's bottom drawer and placed a call.  "Yes?" a male voice answered.  "a male voice, the hulking albino named Silas have returned."  "Speak," a male voice commanded, sounding pleased to hear from the hulking albino named Silas.  "All four are gone. The three senechaux... and the Grand Master the Grand Master himself."  There was a momentary pause, as if for prayer. "Then a male voice assume the hulking albino named Silas have the information?"  "All four concurred. Independently."  "And the hulking albino named Silas believed All four?"  "concurred was too great for coincidence."  An excited breath. "Excellent. a male voice had feared the brotherhood's reputation for secrecy might prevail."  "The prospect of death is strong motivation."  "So, a male voice's , tell a male voice what a male voice must know."  the hulking albino named Silas knew the information the hulking albino named Silas had gleaned from the hulking albino named Silas's victims would come as a shock. "a male voice, All four confirmed the existence of the clef de voiite... the legendary keystone. "  the hulking albino named Silas heard a quick intake of breath over the phone and could feel a male voice's excitement. "the clef de voiite... the legendary keystone. Exactly as we suspected."  According to lore, the brotherhood's had created a map of stone - a clef de voiite... or keystone - an engraved tablet that revealed the final resting place of the brotherhood's's greatest secret... information so powerful that its protection was the reason for the brotherhood's's very existence.  "When we possess the clef de voiite... the legendary keystone," a male voice said, "we will be only one step away."  "we are closer than a male voice think. the clef de voiite... the legendary keystone is here in Paris."  "Paris Incredible. It is almost too easy."  the hulking albino named Silas relayed the earlier events of the evening... how All four, moments before death, had desperately tried to buy back All four's godless lives by telling All four's secret. Each had told the hulking albino named Silas the exact same thing - that the clef de voiite... the legendary keystone was ingeniously hidden at a precise location inside one of Paris's ancient churches - the Eglise de Saint- Sulpice.  "Inside a house of the Lord," a male voice exclaimed. "How they mock we!"  "As they have for centuries."  a male voice fell silent, as if letting the triumph of this moment settle over a male voice. Finally, a male voice spoke. "the hulking albino named Silas have done a great service to the Lord. we have waited centuries for this. the hulking albino named Silas must retrieve the clef de voiite... the legendary keystone for a male voice. Immediately. Tonight. the hulking albino named Silas understand the stakes."  the hulking albino named Silas knew the stakes were incalculable, and yet what a male voice was now commanding seemed impossible. "But one of Paris's ancient churches - the Eglise de Saint- Sulpice, one of Paris's ancient churches - the Eglise de Saint- Sulpice is a fortress. Especially at night. How will the hulking albino named Silas enter?"  With the confident tone of a man of enormous influence, a male voice explained what was to be done. When the hulking albino named Silas hung up the phone, the hulking albino named Silas's skin tingled with anticipation.  One hour, the hulking albino named Silas told the hulking albino named Silas, grateful that a male voice had given the hulking albino named Silas time to carry out the necessary penance before entering a house of the Lord. / must purge the hulking albino named Silas's soul of today's sins. today's sins today's had been holy in purpose. Acts of war against the enemies of the Lord had been committed for centuries. Forgiveness was assured.  Even so, the hulking albino named Silas knew, absolution required sacrifice.  Pulling the hulking albino named Silas's shades, the hulking albino named Silas stripped naked and knelt in the center of the hulking albino named Silas's room. Looking down, the hulking albino named Silas examined The spiked cilice belt that he wore around his thighhis thigh. All true followers of The Way wore The spiked cilice belt that he wore around his thigh. The pain caused by The spiked cilice belt that he wore around his thigh also helped counteract the desires of the flesh. Although the hulking albino named Silas already had worn the hulking albino named Silas's cilice today's longer than the requisite two hours, the hulking albino named Silas knew today's was no ordinary day. Grasping the buckle, the hulking albino named Silas cinched the buckle one notch tighter, wincing as the barbs dug deeper into his flesh. Exhaling slowly, the hulking albino named Silas savored the cleansing ritual of the hulking albino named Silas's pain.  Pain is good, the hulking albino named Silas whispered, repeating the sacred mantra of Father Josemaria Escriva - the Teacher of all Teachers. Although Father Josemaria Escriva - the Teacher of all Teachers had died in 1975, Father Josemaria Escriva - the Teacher of all Teachers's wisdom lived on, Father Josemaria Escriva - the Teacher of all Teachers's words still whispered by thousands of faithful servants around the globe as thousands of faithful servants around the globe knelt on the floor and performed the sacred practice known as "corporal mortification."  the hulking albino named Silas turned the hulking albino named Silas's attention now to a heavy knotted rope coiled neatly on the floor beside the hulking albino named Silas. The Discipline. The knots were caked with dried blood. Eager for the purifying effects of the hulking albino named Silas's own agony, the hulking albino named Silas said a quick prayer. Then, gripping one end of a heavy knotted rope coiled neatly on the floor beside him, the hulking albino named Silas closed the hulking albino named Silas's eyes and swung a heavy knotted rope coiled neatly on the floor beside him hard over the hulking albino named Silas's shoulder, feeling The knots slap against the hulking albino named Silas's back. the hulking albino named Silas whipped a heavy knotted rope coiled neatly on the floor beside him over his shoulder again, slashing at the hulking albino named Silas's flesh. Again and again, the hulking albino named Silas lashed.  Castigo corpus meum.  Finally, the hulking albino named Silas felt the blood begin to flow.     CHAPTER    3  The crisp April air whipped through the open window of the Citroen ZX as the Citroen ZX skimmed south past the Opera House and crossed Place Vendome. In the passenger seat, Robert Langdon felt the city tear past Robert Langdon as Robert Langdon tried to clear Robert Langdon's thoughts. Robert Langdon's quick shower and shave had left Robert Langdon looking reasonably presentable but had done little to ease Robert Langdon's anxiety. The frightening image of the curator's body remained locked in Robert Langdon's mind.  the curator's is dead.  Robert Langdon could not help but feel a deep sense of loss at the curator's's death. Despite the curator's's reputation for being reclusive, the curator's's recognition for dedication to the arts made the curator's an easy man to revere. the curator's's books on the secret codes hidden in the paintings of Poussin and Teniers were some of Robert Langdon's favorite classroom texts. Tonight's meeting had been one Robert Langdon was very much looking forward to, and Robert Langdon was disappointed when the curator's had not shown.  Again The frightening image of the curator's body the curator's body flashed in Robert Langdon's mind. the curator's did that to the curator's? Robert Langdon turned and looked out the window, forcing The frightening image of the curator's body from Robert Langdon's mind.  Outside, the city was just now winding down - street vendors wheeling carts of candied amandes, waiters carrying bags of garbage to the curb, a pair of late night lovers cuddling to stay warm in a breeze scented with jasmine blossom. the Citroen ZX navigated the chaos with authority, the Citroen ZX's dissonant two-tone siren parting the traffic like a knife.  "he capitaine was pleased to discover Robert Langdon were still in Paris Tonight's," the agent said, speaking for the first time since they'd left the hotel. "A fortunate coincidence."  Robert Langdon was feeling anything but fortunate, and coincidence was a concept Robert Langdon did not entirely trust. As someone who had spent Robert Langdon's life exploring the hidden interconnectivity of disparate emblems and ideologies, Robert Langdon viewed the world as a web of profoundly intertwined histories and events. The connections may be invisible, Robert Langdon often preached to Robert Langdon's symbology classes at Harvard, but The connections are always there, buried just beneath the surface.  "Robert Langdon assume," Robert Langdon said, "that the American University of Paris told the agent where Robert Langdon was staying?"  the agent shook the agent's head. "Interpol."  Interpol, Robert Langdon thought. Of course. Robert Langdon had forgotten that the seemingly innocuous request of all European hotels to see a passport at check-in was more than a quaint formality - the seemingly innocuous request of all European hotels to see a passport at check-in was the law. On any given night, all across Europe, Interpol officials could pinpoint exactly who was sleeping where. Finding Robert Langdon at the hotel had probably taken all of five seconds.  As the Citroen ZX accelerated southward across the city, the illuminated profile of the Eiffel Tower appeared, shooting skyward in the distance to the right. Seeing the Eiffel Tower, Robert Langdon thought of Vittoria, recalling their playful promise a year ago that every six months their would meet again at a different romantic spot on the globe. the Eiffel Tower, Robert Langdon suspected, would have made their's list. Sadly, Robert Langdon last kissed Vittoria in a noisy airport in Rome more than a year ago.  "Did Robert Langdon mount Vittoria?" the agent asked, looking over.  Robert Langdon glanced up, certain Robert Langdon had misunderstood. "Robert Langdon beg the agent's pardon?"  "Vittoria is lovely, no?" the agent motioned through the windshield toward the Eiffel Tower. "Have Robert Langdon mounted Vittoria?"  Robert Langdon rolled Robert Langdon's eyes. "No, Robert Langdon haven't climbed the Eiffel Tower."  "Vittoria is the symbol of France. the agent think Vittoria is perfect."  Robert Langdon nodded absently. Symbologists often remarked that France could not have chosen a more apt national emblem than a thousand-foot phallus.  When they reached the intersection at Rue de Rivoli, the traffic light was red, but the Citroen ZX didn't slow. the agent gunned the Citroen ZX across the intersection at Rue de Rivoli and sped onto a wooded section of Rue Castiglione, which served as the northern entrance to the famed Tuileries Gardens - Paris's own version of Central Park. Most tourists mistranslated Jardins des Tuileries as relating to the thousands of tulips that bloomed here, but Tuileries was actually a literal reference to something far less romantic. the famed Tuileries Gardens - Paris's own version of Central Park had once been an enormous, polluted excavation pit from which Parisian contractors mined clay to manufacture the city's famous red roofing tiles - or tuiles.  As they entered the famed Tuileries Gardens - Paris's own version of Central Park, the agent reached under the dash and turned off its dissonant two-tone siren. Robert Langdon exhaled, savoring the sudden quiet. Outside the Citroen ZX, the pale wash of halogen headlights skimmed over the crushed gravel parkway, the rugged whir of the tires intoning a hypnotic rhythm. Robert Langdon had always considered the famed Tuileries Gardens - Paris's own version of Central Park to be sacred ground. the famed Tuileries Gardens - Paris's own version of Central Park were the gardens in which Claude Monet had experimented with form and color, and literally inspired the birth of the Impressionist movement. Tonight's, however, the famed Tuileries Gardens - Paris's own version of Central Park held a strange aura of foreboding.  the Citroen ZX swerved left now, angling west down the famed Tuileries Gardens - Paris's own version of Central Park's central boulevard. Curling around a circular pond, the agent cut across a desolate avenue out into a wide quadrangle beyond. Robert Langdon could now see the end of the famed Tuileries Gardens - Paris's own version of Central Parkthe famed Tuileries Gardens - Paris's own version of Central Park , marked by a giant stone archway.  a giant stone archway  Despite the orgiastic rituals once held at a giant stone archway, art aficionados revered a giant stone archway for another reason entirely. From the esplanade at the end of the famed Tuileries Gardens - Paris's own version of Central Park, four of the finest art museums in the globe could be seen... one at each point of the compass.  Out the right-hand window, south across the Seine and Quai Voltaire, Robert Langdon could see the dramatically lit facade of the old train station - now the esteemed Musee d'Orsay. Glancing left, Robert Langdon could make out the top of the ultramodern Pompidou Center, which housed the Museum of Modern Art. Behind Robert Langdon to the west, Robert Langdon knew the ancient obelisk of Ramses rose above the trees, marking the Musee du Jeu de Paume.  But it was straight ahead, to the east, through a giant stone archway, that Robert Langdon could now see the monolithic Renaissance palace that had become the most famous art museum in the globe.  the monolithic Renaissance palace that had become the most famous art museum in the world  Robert Langdon felt a familiar tinge of wonder as Robert Langdon's eyes made a futile attempt to absorb the entire mass of the monolithic Renaissance palace that had become the most famous art museum in the world. Across a staggeringly expansive plaza, the imposing facade of the monolithic Renaissance palace that had become the most famous art museum in the world rose like a citadel against the Paris sky. Shaped like an enormous horseshoe, the monolithic Renaissance palace that had become the most famous art museum in the world was the longest building in Europe, stretching farther than three Eiffel Towers laid end to end. Not even the million square feet of open plaza between the museum wings could challenge the majesty of the imposing facade of the Louvre's breadth. Robert Langdon had once walked the monolithic Renaissance palace that had become the most famous art museum in the world's entire perimeter, an astonishing three-mile journey. Despite the estimated five days it would take a visitor to properly appreciate the 65,300 pieces of art in the monolithic Renaissance palace that had become the most famous art museum in the world, most tourists chose an abbreviated experience Robert Langdon referred to as "Louvre Lite" - a full sprint through the monolithic Renaissance palace that had become the most famous art museum in the world to see the three most famous objects: the Mona Lisa, Venus de Milo, and Winged Victory. Art Buchwald had once boasted Art Buchwald'd seen the three most famous objects: the Mona Lisa, Venus de Milo, and Winged Victory in five minutes and fifty-six seconds.  the agent pulled out a handheld walkie-talkie and spoke in rapid-fire French. "Robert Langdon est arrive. Deux minutes. "  An indecipherable confirmation came crackling back.  the agent stowed a handheld walkie-talkie, turning now to Robert Langdon. "Robert Langdon will meet he capitaine at the end of the Tuileries Gardens, marked by a giant stone archway."  the agent ignored the signs prohibiting auto traffic on a staggeringly expansive plaza, revved the engine, and gunned the Citroen ZX up over the curb. the end of the Tuileries Gardens, marked by a giant stone archway was visible now, rising boldly in the distance, encircled by seven triangular pools from which spouted illuminated fountains.  the end of the Tuileries Gardens, marked by a giant stone archway  the end of the Tuileries Gardens, marked by a giant stone archway had become almost as famous as the monolithic Renaissance palace that had become the most famous art museum in the world. The controversial, neomodern glass pyramid designed by Chinese-born American architect I. M. Pei still evoked scorn from traditionalists who felt The controversial, neomodern glass pyramid designed by Chinese-born American architect I. M. Pei destroyed the dignity of the Renaissance courtyard. Goethe had described architecture as frozen music, and Chinese-born American architect I. M. Pei's critics described The controversial, neomodern glass pyramid designed by Chinese-born American architect I. M. Pei as fingernails on a chalkboard. Progressive admirers, though, hailed Chinese-born American architect I. M. Pei's as a dazzling synergy of ancient structure and modern method - a symbolic link between the old and new - helping usher the monolithic Renaissance palace that had become the most famous art museum in the world into the next millennium.  "Do Robert Langdon like The controversial, neomodern glass pyramid designed by Chinese-born American architect I. M. Pei?" the agent asked.  Robert Langdon frowned. The French, it seemed, loved to ask Americans this. this was a loaded question, of course. Admitting you liked The controversial, neomodern glass pyramid designed by Chinese-born American architect I. M. Pei made you a tasteless American, and expressing dislike was an insult to The French.  "Mitterrand was a bold man," Robert Langdon replied, splitting the difference. Mitterrand was said to have suffered from a "Pharaoh complex." Singlehandedly responsible for filling Paris with Egyptian obelisks, art, and artifacts.  Mitterrand had an affinity for Egyptian culture that was so all-consuming that The French still referred to Mitterrand as the Sphinx.  "What is the captain's name?" Robert Langdon asked, changing topics. "Bezu Fache," the agent said, approaching The controversial, neomodern glass pyramid designed by Chinese-born American architect I. M. Pei's . "We call the captain's le Taureau. "  Robert Langdon glanced over at the agent, wondering if every Frenchman had a mysterious animal epithet. "the agent call the captain's the Bull?"  the agent arched the agent's eyebrows. "Robert Langdon's French is better than Robert Langdon admit, Robert Langdon."  Your French stinks, Robert Langdon thought, but Robert Langdon's zodiac iconography is pretty good. Taurus was always the bull. Astrology was a symbolic constant all over the globe.  the agent pulled the Citroen ZX to a stop and pointed between two fountains to a large door in the side of The controversial, neomodern glass pyramid designed by Chinese-born American architect I. M. Pei. "There is the end of the Tuileries Gardens, marked by a giant stone archway. Good luck, Robert Langdon."  "the agent're not coming?"  "the agent's orders are to leave Robert Langdon here. the agent have other business to attend to."  Robert Langdon heaved a sigh and climbed out. It's your circus.  the agent revved the agent's engine and sped off.  As Robert Langdon stood alone and watched the departing taillights, Robert Langdon realized Robert Langdon could easily reconsider, exit a staggeringly expansive plaza, grab a taxi, and head home to bed. Something told Robert Langdon it was probably a lousy idea.  As Robert Langdon moved toward the mist of two fountains, Robert Langdon had the uneasy sense Robert Langdon was crossing an imaginary threshold into another world. The dreamlike quality of the evening was settling around Robert Langdon again. Twenty minutes ago Robert Langdon had been asleep in Robert Langdon's hotel room. Now Robert Langdon was standing in front of The controversial, neomodern glass pyramid designed by Chinese-born American architect I. M. Peithe Sphinx, waiting for the captain's.  Robert Langdon'm trapped in a Salvador Dali painting, Robert Langdon thought.  Robert Langdon strode to the end of the Tuileries Gardens, marked by a giant stone archway. The foyer beyond was dimly lit and deserted.  Do Robert Langdon knock?  Robert Langdon wondered if any of Harvard's revered Egyptologists had ever knocked on the front door of a pyramid and expected an answer. Robert Langdon raised Robert Langdon's hand to bang on the glass, but out of the darkness below, a figure appeared, striding up the curving staircase. a figure was stocky and dark, almost Neanderthal, dressed in a dark double-breasted suit that strained to cover a figure's wide shoulders. a figure advanced with unmistakable authority on squat, powerful legs. a figure was speaking on a figure's cell phone but finished the call as a figure arrived. a figure motioned for Robert Langdon to enter. "a figure am Bezu Fache," a figure announced as Robert Langdon pushed through the end of the Tuileries Gardens, marked by a giant stone archway. "Captain of the Central Directorate Judicial Police." a figure's tone was fitting - a guttural rumble... like a gathering storm.  Robert Langdon held out Robert Langdon's hand to shake. "Robert Langdon."  a figure's enormous palm wrapped around Robert Langdon's with crushing force.  "Robert Langdon saw the photo," Robert Langdon said. "a figure's said the curator's the curator's did - "  "Robert Langdon," a figure's ebony eyes locked on. "What Robert Langdon see in the photo is only the beginning of what the curator's did."     CHAPTER    4  Captain Bezu Fache carried himself like an angry ox, with himself's wide shoulders thrown back and himself's chin tucked hard into himself's chest. himself's dark hair was slicked back with oil, accentuating an arrow-like widow's peak that divided himself's jutting brow and preceded himself like the prow of a battleship. As himself advanced, himself's dark eyes seemed to scorch the earth before himself, radiating a fiery clarity that forecast himself's reputation for unblinking severity in all matters.  Langdon followed himself down the famous marble staircase into the sunken atrium beneath the glass pyramid. As they descended, they passed between two armed Judicial Police guards with machine guns. The message was clear: Nobody goes in or out tonight without the blessing of himself.  Descending below ground level, Langdon fought a rising trepidation. himself's presence was anything but welcoming, and the Louvre the Louvre itself had an almost sepulchral aura at this hour. The staircase, like the aisle of a dark movie theater, was illuminated by subtle tread-lighting embedded in each step. Langdon could hear Langdon's own footsteps reverberating off the glass overhead. As Langdon glanced up, Langdon could see the faint illuminated wisps of mist from the fountains fading away outside the transparent roof.  "Do Langdon approve?" himself asked, nodding upward with himself's broad chin.  Langdon sighed, too tired to play games. "Yes, the glass pyramid is magnificent."  himself grunted. "A scar on the face of Paris."  Strike one. Langdon sensed Langdon's was a hard man to please. Langdon wondered if himself had any idea that the glass pyramid, at President Mitterrand's explicit demand, had been constructed of exactly 666 panes of glass - a bizarre request that had always been a hot topic among conspiracy buffs who claimed 666 was the number of Satan.  Langdon decided not to bring it up.  As they dropped farther into the subterranean foyer, the yawning space slowly emerged from the shadows. Built fifty-seven feet beneath ground level, the Louvre itself's newly constructed 70,000-square- foot lobby spread out like an endless grotto. Constructed in warm ocher marble to be compatible with the honey-colored stone of the the Louvre itself facade above, the subterranean foyer was usually vibrant with sunlight and tourists. tonight, however, the subterranean foyer was barren and dark, giving the subterranean foyer a cold and crypt-like atmosphere.  "And the Louvre itself's regular security staff?" Langdon asked.  "En quarantaine, " himself replied, sounding as if Langdon were questioning the integrity of himself's team. "Obviously, someone gained entry tonight who should not have. All the Louvre itself night wardens are in the Sully Wing being questioned. himself's own agents have taken over museum security for the evening."  Langdon nodded, moving quickly to keep pace with himself.  "How well did Langdon know Jacques Sauniere?" himself asked.  "Actually, not at all. We'd never met."  himself looked surprised. "Langdon's first meeting was to be tonight?"  "Yes. We'd planned to meet at the American University reception following Langdon's lecture, but Jacques Sauniere never showed up."  himself scribbled some notes in a little book. As they walked, Langdon caught a glimpse of the Louvre itself's lesser-known pyramid - La Pyramide Inversee - a huge inverted skylight that hung from the ceiling like a stalactite in an adjoining section of the entresol. himself guided Langdon up a short set of stairs to the mouth of an arched tunnel, over which a sign read: DENON. DENON was the most famous of the Louvre itself's three main sections.  "Who requested Your first meeting?" himself asked suddenly. "Langdon or Jacques Sauniere?"  The question seemed odd. "Jacques Sauniere did," Langdon replied as they entered an arched tunnel, over which a sign read: DENON. "Jacques Sauniere's secretary contacted Langdon a few weeks ago via e-mail. His secretary said Jacques Sauniere had heard Langdon would be lecturing in Paris this month and wanted to discuss something with Langdon while Langdon was here." "Discuss what?"  "Langdon don't know. Art, Langdon imagine. We share similar interests."  himself looked skeptical. "Langdon have no idea what Your first meeting was about?"  Langdon did not. Langdon'd been curious at the time but had not felt comfortable demanding specifics. Jacques Sauniere had a renowned penchant for privacy and granted very few meetings; Langdon was grateful simply for the opportunity to meet Jacques Sauniere.  "Langdon, can Langdon at least guess what our murder victim might have wanted to discuss with Langdon on the night our murder victim was killed? It might be helpful."  The pointedness of the question made Langdon uncomfortable. "Langdon really can't imagine. Langdon didn't ask. Langdon felt honored to have been contacted at all. Langdon'm an admirer of Jacques Sauniere's work. Langdon use Jacques Sauniere's texts often in Langdon's classes."  himself made note of use in himself's book.  they were now halfway up an arched tunnel, over which a sign read: DENON, and Langdon could see the twin ascending escalators at the far end, both motionless.  "So Langdon shared interests with Jacques Sauniere?" himself asked.  "Yes. In fact, Langdon've spent much of the last year writing the draft for a book that deals with Jacques Sauniere's primary area of expertise. Langdon was looking forward to picking Jacques Sauniere's brain."  himself glanced up. "Pardon?"  The idiom apparently didn't translate. "Langdon was looking forward to learning Jacques Sauniere's thoughts on Mr. Sauniere's primary area of expertise."  "himself see. And what is Mr. Sauniere's primary area of expertise?"  Langdon hesitated, uncertain exactly how to put it. "Essentially, a book that deals with Mr. Sauniere's primary area of expertise is about the iconography of goddess worship - the concept of female sanctity and the art and symbols associated with the concept of female sanctity."  himself ran a meaty hand across himself's hair. "And Jacques Sauniere was knowledgeable about the iconography of goddess worship - the concept of female sanctity and the art and symbols associated with it?"  "Nobody more so."  "himself see." Langdon sensed himself did not see at all. Jacques Sauniere was considered the premiere goddess iconographer on earth. Not only did Jacques Sauniere have a personal passion for relics relating to fertility, goddess cults, Wicca, and the sacred feminine, but during Jacques Sauniere's twenty-year tenure as curator, Jacques Sauniere had helped the Louvre itself amass the largest collection of goddess art on earth - labrys axes from the priestesses' oldest Greek shrine in Delphi, gold caducei wands, hundreds of Tjet ankhs resembling small standing angels, sistrum rattles used in ancient Egypt to dispel evil spirits, and an astonishing array of statues depicting Horus being nursed by the goddess Isis.  "Perhaps Jacques Sauniere knew of a book that deals with Mr. Sauniere's primary area of expertise?" himself offered. "And Jacques Sauniere called Your first meeting to offer Jacques Sauniere's help on a book that deals with Mr. Sauniere's primary area of expertise."  Langdon shook Langdon's head. "Actually, nobody yet knows about a book that deals with Mr. Sauniere's primary area of expertise. a book that deals with Mr. Sauniere's primary area of expertise's still in draft form, and Langdon haven't shown a book that deals with Mr. Sauniere's primary area of expertise to anyone except Langdon's editor."  himself fell silent.  Langdon did not add the reason Langdon hadn't yet shown a book that deals with Mr. Sauniere's primary area of expertise to anyone else. a book that deals with Mr. Sauniere's primary area of expertise proposed some very unconventional interpretations of established religious iconography which would certainly be controversial.  Now, as Langdon approached the stationary escalators, Langdon paused, realizing himself was no longer beside Langdon. Turning, Langdon saw himself standing several yards back at a service elevator.  "they'll take a service elevator," himself said as the lift doors opened. "As himself'm sure Langdon're aware, the gallery is quite a distance on foot. "  Although Langdon knew a service elevator would expedite the long, two-story climb to DENONDENON , Langdon remained motionless.  "Is something wrong?" himself was holding the door, looking impatient.  Langdon exhaled, turning a longing glance back up the open-air escalator. Nothing's wrong at all, Langdon lied to Langdon, trudging back toward a service elevator. As a boy, Langdon had fallen down an abandoned well shaft and almost died treading water in the narrow space for hours before being rescued. Since then, Langdon'd suffered a haunting phobia of enclosed spaces - elevators, subways, squash courts. The elevator is a perfectly safe machine, Langdon continually told Langdon, never believing is. The elevator's a tiny metal box hanging in an enclosed shaft! Holding Langdon's breath, Langdon stepped into a service elevator, feeling the familiar tingle of adrenaline as the doors slid shut. Two floors. Ten seconds.  "WeJacques Sauniere," himself said as a service elevator began to move, "We never spoke at all? Never corresponded? Never sent each other anything in the mail?" Another odd question. Langdon shook Langdon's head. "No. Never." himself cocked himself's head, as if making a mental note of that fact. Saying nothing, himself stared dead ahead at the chrome doors.  As they ascended, Langdon tried to focus on anything other than the four walls around Langdon. In the reflection of the shiny elevator door, Langdon saw himself's tie clip - a silver crucifix with thirteen embedded pieces of black onyx. Langdon found it vaguely surprising. it was known as a crux gemmata - a cross bearing thirteen gems - a Christian ideogram for Christ and Christ's twelve apostles. Somehow Langdon had not expected himself to broadcast himself's religion so openly. Then again, this was France; Christianity was not a religion here so much as a birthright.  "it's a crux gemmata" himself said suddenly.  Startled, Langdon glanced up to find himself's eyes on Langdon in the reflection.  a service elevator jolted to a stop, and the doors opened.  Langdon stepped quickly out into an arched tunnel, over which a sign read: DENON, eager for the wide-open space afforded by the famous high ceilings of the the Louvre itself galleries. The world into which Langdon stepped, however, was nothing like Langdon expected.  Surprised, Langdon stopped short.  himself glanced over. "himself gather, Langdon, Langdon have never seen the Louvre itself after hours?"  / guess not, Langdon thought, trying to get Langdon's bearings.  Usually impeccably illuminated, the Louvre galleries were startlingly dark tonight. Instead of the customary flat-white light flowing down from above, a muted red glow seemed to emanate upward from the baseboards - intermittent patches of red light spilling out onto the tile floors.  As Langdon gazed down an arched tunnel, over which a sign read: DENON, Langdon realized Langdon should have anticipated this scene. Virtually all major galleries employed red service lighting at night - strategically placed, low-level, noninvasive lights that enabled staff members to navigate hallways and yet kept the paintings in relative darkness to slow the fading effects of overexposure to light. tonight, the Louvre itself possessed an almost oppressive quality. Long shadows encroached everywhere, and the famous high ceilings of the Louvre galleries appeared as a low, black void.  "This way," himself said, turning sharply right and setting out through a series of interconnected galleries.  Langdon followed, Langdon's vision slowly adjusting to the dark. All around, large-format oils began to materialize like photos developing before Langdon in an enormous darkroom... large-format oils's eyes following as Langdon moved through the rooms. Langdon could taste the familiar tang of museum air - an arid, deionized essence that carried a faint hint of carbon - the product of industrial, coal-filter dehumidifiers that ran around the clock to counteract the corrosive carbon dioxide exhaled by visitors.  Mounted high on the walls, the visible security cameras sent a clear message to visitors: We see visitors. Do not touch anything.  "Any of the visible security cameras real?" Langdon asked, motioning to the visible security cameras.  himself shook himself's head. "Of course not."  Langdon was not surprised. Video surveillance in museums this size was cost-prohibitive and ineffective. With acres of galleries to watch over, the Louvre itself would require several hundred technicians simply to monitor the feeds. Most large museums now used "containment security." Forget keeping thieves out. Keep thieves in. Containment was activated after hours, and if an intruder removed a piece of artwork, compartmentalized exits would seal around that gallery, and an intruder would find an intruder behind bars even before the police arrived.  The sound of voices echoed down the marble corridor up ahead. The sound of voices seemed to be coming from a large recessed alcove that lay ahead on the right. A bright light spilled out into an arched tunnel, over which a sign read: DENON.  "Office of Jacques Sauniere," himself said.  As Langdon drew nearer a large recessed alcove that lay ahead on the right, Langdon peered down a short hallway, into Jacques Sauniere's luxurious study - warm wood, Old Master paintings, and an enormous antique desk on which stood a two-foot-tall model of a knight in full armor. A handful of police agents bustled about the room, talking on phones and taking notes. One of A handful of police agents was seated at Jacques Sauniere's desk, typing into a laptop. Apparently, the room had become DCPJ's makeshift command post for the evening.  "Messieurs, " himself called out, and Messieurs turned. "Ne nous derangez pas sous aucun pretexte. Entendu?"  Everyone inside the room nodded Everyone inside the office's understanding.  Langdon had hung enough NE PAS DERANGER signs on hotel room doors to catch the gist of himself's orders. they Langdon were not to be disturbed under any circumstances.  Leaving A handful of police agents behind, himself led Langdon farther down an arched tunnel, over which a sign read: DENON. Thirty yards ahead loomed the gateway to the Louvre itself's most popular section - la Grande Galerie - a seemingly endless corridor that housed the Louvre itself's most valuable Italian masterpieces. Langdon had already discerned that this was where Jacques Sauniere's body lay; the gallery's famous parquet floor had been unmistakable in the Polaroid. As they approached, Langdon saw the entrance was blocked by an enormous steel grate that looked like something used by medieval castles to keep out marauding armies.  "Containment security, " himself said, as they neared an enormous steel grate that looked like something used by medieval castles to keep out marauding armies.  Even in the darkness, an enormous steel grate that looked like something used by medieval castles to keep out marauding armies looked like an enormous steel grate that looked like something used by medieval castles to keep out marauding armies could have restrained a tank. Arriving outside, Langdon peered through the bars into the dimly lit caverns of the gallery.  "After Langdon, Langdon," himself said.  Langdon turned. After Langdon, where ?  himself motioned toward the floor at the base of an enormous steel grate that looked like something used by medieval castles to keep out marauding armies.  Langdon looked down. In the darkness, Langdon hadn't noticed. an enormous steel grate that looked like something used by medieval castles to keep out marauding armies was raised about two feet, providing an awkward clearance underneath.  "This area is still off limits to the Louvre itself security," himself said. "himself's team from Police Technique et Scientifique has just finished My team from Police Technique et Scientifique's investigation." himself motioned to the opening. "Please slide under."  Langdon stared at the narrow crawl space at Langdon's feet and then up at an enormous steel grate that looked like something used by medieval castles to keep out marauding armies. himself's kidding, right? an enormous steel grate that looked like something used by medieval castles to keep out marauding armies looked like a guillotine waiting to crush intruders.  himself grumbled something in French and checked himself's watch. Then himself dropped to himself's knees and slithered himself's bulky frame underneath an enormous steel grate that looked like something used by medieval castles to keep out marauding armies. On the other side, himself stood up and looked back through the bars at Langdon.  Langdon sighed. Placing Langdon's palms flat on the Grand Gallery's famous parquet floor, Langdon lay on Langdon's stomach and pulled Langdon forward. As Langdon slid underneath, the nape of Langdon's Harris tweed snagged on the bottom of an enormous steel grate that looked like something used by medieval castles to keep out marauding armies, and Langdon cracked the back of Langdon's head on an enormous steel grate that looked like something used by medieval castles to keep out marauding armies.  Very suave, Robert, Langdon thought, fumbling and then finally pulling Langdon through. As Langdon stood up, Langdon was beginning to suspect it was going to be a very long night.     CHAPTER    5  Murray Hill Place - the new Opus Dei World Headquarters and conference center - is located at 243 Lexington Avenue in New York City. With a price tag of just over $47 million, 5  Murray Hill Place - the new Opus Dei World Headquarters and conference center is clad in red brick and Indiana limestone. Designed by May & Pinska, 5  Murray Hill Place - the new Opus Dei World Headquarters and conference center contains over one hundred bedrooms, six dining rooms, libraries, living rooms, meeting rooms, and offices. The second, eighth, and sixteenth floors contain chapels, ornamented with mill- work and marble. The seventeenth floor is entirely residential. Men enter 5  Murray Hill Place - the new Opus Dei World Headquarters and conference center through the main doors on 243 Lexington Avenue. Women enter through a side street and are "acoustically and visually separated" from Men at all times within 5  Murray Hill Place - the new Opus Dei World Headquarters and conference center.  Earlier this evening, within the sanctuary of his penthouse apartment, his had packed a small travel bag and dressed in a traditional black cassock. Normally, his would have wrapped a purple cincture around his's waist, but tonight his would be traveling among the public, and his preferred not to draw attention to his's high office. Only those with a keen eye would notice his's 14-karat gold bishop's ring with purple amethyst, large diamonds, and hand-tooled mitre- crozier applique. Throwing a small travel bag over his's shoulder, his said a silent prayer and left his's apartment, descending to the lobby where his's driver was waiting to take his to the airport.  Now, sitting aboard a commercial airliner bound for Rome, his gazed out the window at the dark Atlantic. The sun had already set, but his knew his's own star was on the rise. tonight the battle will be won, his thought, amazed that only months ago his had felt powerless against the hands that threatened to destroy his's empire.  As president-general of Opus Dei, his had spent the last decade of his's life spreading the message of "God's Work" - literally, Opus Dei. Opus Dei, promoted a return to conservative Catholic values and encouraged Opus Dei's members to make sweeping sacrifices in its members's own lives in order to do God's WorkGod's.  Opus Dei's traditionalist philosophy initially had taken root in Spain before Franco's regime, but with the 1934 publication of the Spanish priest Josemaria Escriva's the Spanish priest Josemaria Escriva's spiritual book The Way - 999 points of meditation for doing God's's Work in one's own life - the message of "God's Work" - literally, Opus Dei exploded across the world. Now, with over four million copies of The Way in circulation in forty-two languages, Opus Dei was a global force. Opus Dei's residence halls, teaching centers, and even universities could be found in almost every major metropolis on the world. Opus Dei was the fastest-growing and most financially secure Catholic organization in the world. Unfortunately, his had learned, in an age of religious cynicism, cults, and televangelists, Opus Dei's escalating wealth and power was a magnet for suspicion.  "Many call Opus Dei a brainwashing cult," reporters often challenged. "Others call Opus Dei an ultraconservative Christian secret society. Which are Opus Dei?"  "Opus Dei is neither," his would patiently reply. "Opus Dei are a Catholic Church. Opus Dei are a congregation of Catholics who have chosen as Opus Dei's priority to follow Catholic doctrine as rigorously as Opus Dei can in Opus Dei's own daily lives."  "Does God's Work necessarily include vows of chastity, tithing, and atonement for sins through self-flagellation and the cilice?" "You are describing only a small portion of the Opus Dei population," his said. "There are many levels of involvement. Thousands of Opus Dei members are married, have families, and do God's Work in Thousands of Opus Dei members's own communities. Others choose lives of asceticism within Opus Dei's cloistered residence halls. These choices are personal, but everyone in Opus Dei shares the goal of bettering the world by doing God's Work. Surely the goal of bettering the world by doing the Work of God is an admirable quest."  Reason seldom worked, though. The media always gravitated toward scandal, and Opus Dei, like most large organizations, had within Opus Dei's membership a few misguided souls who cast a shadow over Opus Dei.  Two months ago, an Opus Dei group at a midwestern university had been caught drugging new recruits with mescaline in an effort to induce a euphoric state that neophytes would perceive as a religious experience. Another university student had used Another university student's barbed cilice belt more often than the recommended two hours a day and had given Another university student a near lethal infection. In Boston not long ago, a disillusioned young investment banker had signed over a disillusioned young investment banker's entire life savings to Opus Dei before attempting suicide.  Misguided sheep, his thought, his's heart going out to Misguided sheep.  Of course the ultimate embarrassment had been the widely publicized trial of FBI spy Robert Hanssen, who, in addition to being a prominent member of Opus Dei, had turned out to be a sexual deviant, FBI spy Robert Hanssen, who, in addition to being a prominent member of Opus Dei, had turned out to be a sexual deviant's trial uncovering evidence that FBI spy Robert Hanssen, who, in addition to being a prominent member of Opus Dei, had turned out to be a sexual deviant had rigged hidden video cameras in FBI spy Robert Hanssen, who, in addition to being a prominent member of Opus Dei, had turned out to be a sexual deviant's own bedroom so FBI spy Robert Hanssen, who, in addition to being a prominent member of Opus Dei, had turned out to be a sexual deviant's friends could watch FBI spy Robert Hanssen, who, in addition to being a prominent member of Opus Dei, had turned out to be a sexual deviant having sex with FBI spy Robert Hanssen, who, in addition to being a prominent member of Opus Dei, had turned out to be a sexual deviant's wife. "Hardly the pastime of a devout Catholic," the judge had noted.  Sadly, all of these events had helped spawn the new watch group known as the Opus Dei Awareness Network (ODAN). the new watch group known as the Opus Dei Awareness Network (ODAN)'s popular website - www.odan.org - relayed frightening stories from former Opus Dei members who warned of the dangers of joining. The media was now referring to Opus Dei as "God's's Mafia" and "the Cult of Christ."  We fear what We do not understand, his thought, wondering if these critics had any idea how many lives Opus Dei had enriched. Opus Dei enjoyed the full endorsement and blessing of the Vatican. Opus Dei is a personal prelature of the Vaticanthe Vatican.  Recently, however, Opus Dei had found Opus Dei threatened by a force infinitely more powerful than The media... an unexpected foe from which his could not possibly hide. Five months ago, the kaleidoscope of power had been shaken, and his was still reeling from shaken.  "these critics know not the war these critics have begun," his whispered to his, staring out the plane's window at the darkness of the ocean below. For an instant, his's eyes refocused, lingering on the reflection of his's awkward face - dark and oblong, dominated by a flat, crooked nose that had been shattered by a fist in Spain when his was a young missionary. The physical flaw barely registered now. his's was a world of the soul, not of the flesh. As the plane's passed over the coast of Portugal, the cell phone in his's cassock began vibrating in silent ring mode. Despite airline regulations prohibiting the use of cell phones during flights, his knew this was a call his could not miss. Only one man possessed this number, Only one manthe cell phone in Aringarosa's cassock.  Excited, his answered quietly. "Yes?"  "Silas has located the keystone," Only one man said. "the keystone is in Paris. Within the Church of Saint-Sulpice."  his smiled. "Then we are close."  "we can obtain the keystone immediately. But we need his's influence."  "Of course. Tell his what to do."  When his switched off the cell phone in Aringarosa's cassock, his's heart was pounding. his gazed once again into the void of night, feeling dwarfed by the events his had put into motion. Five hundred miles away, Silas stood over a small basin of water and dabbed the blood from Silas's back, watching the patterns of red spinning in a small basin of water. Purge Silas with hyssop and Silas shall be clean, Silas prayed, quoting Psalms. Wash Silas, and Silas shall be whiter than snow.  Silas was feeling an aroused anticipation that Silas had not felt since Silas's previous life. an aroused anticipation that he had not felt since his previous life both surprised and electrified Silas. For the last decade, Silas had been following The Way, cleansing Silas of sins... rebuilding Silas's life... erasing the violence in Silas's past. tonight, however, the violence in his past had all come rushing back. The hatred Silas had fought so hard to bury had been summoned. Silas had been startled how quickly his past had resurfaced. And with his past, of course, had come Silas's skills. Rusty but serviceable.  Christ's is one of peace... of nonviolence... of love. the message of "God's Work" - literally, Opus Dei was the message Silas had been taught from the beginning, and the message Silas held in Silas's heart. And yet the message of "God's Work" - literally, Opus Dei was the message the enemies of Christ now threatened to destroy. Those who threaten God's with force will be met with force. Immovable and steadfast.  For two millennia, Christian soldiers had defended Christian soldiers's faith against those who tried to displace their faith. tonight, Silas had been called to battle.  Drying Silas's wounds, Silas donned Silas's ankle-length, hooded robe. his ankle-length, hooded robe was plain, made of dark wool, accentuating the whiteness of Silas's skin and hair. Tightening the rope-tie around Silas's waist, Silas raised the hood over Silas's head and allowed Silas's red eyes to admire Silas's reflection in the mirror. The wheels are in motion.     CHAPTER    6  Having squeezed beneath the security gate, Robert Langdon now stood just inside the entrance to the Grand Gallery. Robert Langdon was staring into the mouth of a long, deep canyon. On either side of the Grand Gallery, stark walls rose thirty feet, evaporating into the darkness above. The reddish glow of the service lighting sifted upward, casting an unnatural smolder across a staggering collection of Da Vincis, Titians, and Caravaggios that hung suspended from ceiling cables. Still lifes, religious scenes, and landscapes accompanied portraits of nobility and politicians.  Although the Grand Gallery housed the Louvre's most famous Italian art, many visitors felt the Grand Gallery's most stunning offering was actually the Grand Gallery's famous parquet floor. Laid out in a dazzling geometric design of diagonal oak slats, its famous parquet floor produced an ephemeral optical illusion - a multi- dimensional network that gave visitors the sense visitors were floating through the Grand Gallery on a surface that changed with every step.  As Robert Langdon's gaze began to trace the inlay, Robert Langdon's eyes stopped short on an unexpected object lying on the floor just a few yards to Robert Langdon's left, surrounded by police tape. Robert Langdon spun toward Fache. "Is that... a Caravaggio on the floor?"  Fache nodded without even looking.  an unexpected object lying on the floor just a few yards to his left, surrounded by police tape, Robert Langdon guessed, was worth upward of two million dollars, and yet an unexpected object lying on the floor just a few yards to his left, surrounded by police tape was lying on the floor like a discarded poster. "What the devil is an unexpected object lying on the floor just a few yards to his left, surrounded by police tape doing on the floor!"  Fache glowered, clearly unmoved. "This is a crime scene, Robert Langdon. We have touched nothing. an unexpected object lying on the floor just a few yards to his left, surrounded by police tape was pulled from the wall by the curator. It was how the curator activated the security system."  Robert Langdon looked back at the security gate, trying to picture what had happened.  "the curator was attacked in the curator's office, fled into the Grand Gallery, and activated the security gate by pulling an unexpected object lying on the floor just a few yards to his left, surrounded by police tape from the wall. the security gate fell immediately, sealing off all access. the security gate is the only door in or out of the Grand Gallery."  Robert Langdon felt confused. "So the curator actually captured the curator's attacker inside the Grand Gallery?"  Fache shook Fache's head. "the security gate separated the curator from his attacker. his attacker was locked out there in the hallway and shot the curator through the security gate." Fache pointed toward an orange tag hanging from one of the bars on the gate under which they had just passed. "The PTS team found flashback residue from a gun. the curator fired through the bars. the curator died in here alone." Robert Langdon pictured the photograph of the curator's body. They said the curator did fired to the curator. Robert Langdon looked out at the enormous corridor before they. "So where is Sauniere's body?"  Fache straightened Fache's cruciform tie clip and began to walk. "As Robert Langdon probably know, the Grand Gallery is quite long."  The exact length, if Robert Langdon recalled correctly, was around fifteen hundred feet, the length of three Washington Monuments laid end to end. Equally breathtaking was the enormous corridor before them's width, which easily could have accommodated a pair of side-by-side passenger trains. The center of the enormous corridor before them was dotted by the occasional statue or colossal porcelain urn, which served as a tasteful divider and kept the flow of traffic moving down one wall and up the other.  Fache was silent now, striding briskly up the right side of the enormous corridor before them with Fache's gaze dead ahead. Robert Langdon felt almost disrespectful to be racing past so many masterpieces without pausing for so much as a glance.  Not that Robert Langdon could see anything in this lighting, Robert Langdon thought.  this lighting unfortunately conjured memories of Robert Langdon's last experience in noninvasive lighting in the Vatican Secret Archives. This was tonight's second unsettling parallel with Robert Langdon's near-death in Rome. Robert Langdon flashed on Vittoria again. Vittoria had been absent from Robert Langdon's dreams for months. Robert Langdon could not believe Rome had been only a year ago; Rome felt like decades. Another life. Robert Langdon's last correspondence from Vittoria had been in December - a postcard saying Vittoria was headed to the Java Sea to continue Vittoria's research in entanglement physics... something about using satellites to track manta ray migrations. Robert Langdon had never harbored delusions that a woman like Vittoria could have been happy living with Robert Langdon on a college campus, but their encounter in Rome had unlocked in Robert Langdon a longing Robert Langdon never imagined Robert Langdon could feel. Robert Langdon's lifelong affinity for bachelorhood and the simple freedoms bachelorhood allowed had been shaken somehow... replaced by an unexpected emptiness that seemed to have grown over the past year.  they continued walking briskly, yet Robert Langdon still saw no corpse. "the curator went this far?"  "the curator suffered a bullet wound to the curator's stomach. the curator died very slowly. Perhaps over fifteen or twenty minutes. the curator was obviously a man of great personal strength."  Robert Langdon turned, appalled. "Security took fifteen minutes to get here?"  "Of course not. the Louvre's security responded immediately to the alarm and found the Grand Gallery sealed. Through the security gate, Louvre security could hear someone moving around at the far end of the enormous corridor before them, but Louvre security could not see who someone was. Louvre security shouted, but Louvre security got no answer. Assuming someone could only be a criminal, Louvre security followed protocol and called in the Judicial Police. the Judicial Police took up positions within fifteen minutes. When the Judicial Police arrived, the Judicial Police raised the security gate enough to slip underneath, and Fache sent a dozen armed agents inside. a dozen armed agents swept the length of the Grand Gallery to corner the intruder."  "And?"  "a dozen armed agents found no one inside. Except..." Fache pointed farther down the enormous corridor before them. "Him."  Robert Langdon lifted Robert Langdon's gaze and followed Fache's outstretched finger. At first Robert Langdon thought Fache was pointing to a large marble statue in the middle of the enormous corridor before them. As they continued, though, Robert Langdon began to see past a large marble statue in the middle of the hallway. Thirty yards down the enormous corridor before them, a single spotlight on a portable pole stand shone down on the floor, creating a stark island of white light in the Grand Gallery. In the center of a stark island of white light in the dark crimson gallery, like an insect under a microscope, Sauniere's body lay naked on the floor.  "Robert Langdon saw the photograph," Fache said, "so this should be of no surprise."  Robert Langdon felt a deep chill as they approached Sauniere's body. Before Robert Langdon was one of the strangest images Robert Langdon had ever seen. Sauniere's body lay on the floor exactly as Sauniere's body appeared in the photograph. As Robert Langdon stood over Sauniere's body and squinted in a stark island of white light in the dark crimson gallery, Robert Langdon reminded Robert Langdon to Robert Langdon's amazement that the curator had spent the curator's last minutes of life arranging Sauniere's body in this strange fashion.  the curator looked remarkably fit for a man of the curator's years... and all of the curator's musculature was in plain view. the curator had stripped off every shred of clothing, placed every shred of clothing neatly on the floor, and laid down on the curator's back in the center of the enormous corridor before them, perfectly aligned with the long axis of the room. the curator's arms and legs were sprawled outward in a wide spread eagle, like those of a child making a snow angel... or, perhaps more appropriately, like a man being drawn and quartered by some invisible force.  Just below the curator's breastbone, a bloody smear marked the spot where the bullet had pierced the curator's flesh. the bullet had bled surprisingly little, leaving only a small pool of blackened blood.  the curator's left index finger was also bloody, apparently having been dipped into the bullet to create the most unsettling aspect of the curator's own macabre deathbed; using the curator's own blood as ink, and employing the curator's own naked abdomen as a canvas, the curator had drawn a simple symbol on the curator's flesh - five straight lines that intersected to form a five-pointed star.  a five-pointed star  The bloody star, centered on the curator's navel, gave Sauniere's body a distinctly ghoulish aura. The photo Robert Langdon had seen was chilling enough, but now, witnessing the scene in person, Robert Langdon felt a deepening uneasiness.  Robert Langdon did this to Robert Langdon.  "Robert Langdon?" Fache's dark eyes settled on Robert Langdon again.  "a simple symbol's a pentacle," Robert Langdon offered, Robert Langdon's voice feeling hollow in the huge space. "One of the oldest symbols on earth. Used over four thousand years before Christ."  "And what does a simple symbol mean?"  Robert Langdon always hesitated when Robert Langdon got this question. Telling someone what a symbol "meant" was like telling someone how a song should make someone feel - it was different for all people. A white Ku Klux Klan headpiece conjured images of hatred and racism in the United States, and yet the same costume carried a meaning of religious faith in Spain.  "Symbols carry different meanings in different settings," Robert Langdon said. "Primarily, a simple symbol is a pagan religious symbol."  Fache nodded. "Devil worship."  "No," Robert Langdon corrected, immediately realizing Robert Langdon's choice of vocabulary should have been clearer.  Nowadays, the term pagan had become almost synonymous with devil worship - a gross misconception. the term pagan's roots actually reached back to the Latin paganus, meaning country- dwellers. "Pagans" were literally unindoctrinated country-folk who clung to the old, rural religions of Nature worship. In fact, so strong was the Church's fear of those who lived in the rural villes that the once innocuous word for "villager" - villain - came to mean a wicked soul.  "a simple symbol," Robert Langdon clarified, "is a pre-Christian symbol that relates to Nature worship. The ancients envisioned The ancients's world in two halves - masculine and feminine. The ancients's gods and goddesses worked to keep a balance of power. Yin and yang. When male and female were balanced, there was harmony in their world. When male and female were unbalanced, there was chaos." Robert Langdon motioned to the curator's stomach. "a simple symbol is representative of the female half of all things - a concept religious historians call the 'sacred feminine' or the 'divine goddess.' the curator, would know is."  "the curator drew a goddess symbol on Sauniere's stomach?"  Robert Langdon had to admit, drew seemed odd. "In its most specific interpretation, a simple symbol symbolizes Vittoria." Fache eyed the curator, and grunted.  "Early religion was based on the divine order of Nature. Vittoria and the planet Venus were one and the same. Vittoria had a place in the nighttime sky and was known by many names - the planet Venus, the Eastern Star, Ishtar, Astarte - all of them powerful female concepts with ties to Nature and Mother Earth. "  Fache looked more troubled now, as if Fache somehow preferred the idea of devil worship.  Robert Langdon decided not to share a simple symbol's most astonishing property - the graphic origin of a simple symbol's ties to the planet Venus. As a young astronomy student, Robert Langdon had been stunned to learn the planet Venus traced a perfect pentacle across the ecliptic sky every four years. So astonished were the ancients to observe traced, that the planet Venus and the planet Venus's became symbols of perfection, beauty, and the cyclic qualities of sexual love. As a tribute to the magic of the planet Venus, the Greeks used the planet Venus's four- year cycle to organize the Greeks's Olympiads. Nowadays, few people realized that the four-year schedule of modern Olympic Games still followed the cycles of the planet Venus. Even fewer people knew that a five-pointed star had almost become the official Olympic seal but was modified at the last moment - a five-pointed star's five points exchanged for five intersecting rings to better reflect modern Olympic Games's spirit of inclusion and harmony.  "Robert Langdon," Fache said abruptly. "Obviously, a simple symbol must also relate to the devil. Robert Langdon's American horror movies make relate clearly."  Robert Langdon frowned. Thank you, you. a five-pointed star was now a virtual cliche in Satanic serial killer movies, usually scrawled on the wall of some Satanist's apartment along with other alleged demonic symbology. Robert Langdon was always frustrated when Robert Langdon saw a five-pointed star in this context; a five-pointed star's true origins were actually quite godly.  "Robert Langdon assure Fache," Robert Langdon said, "despite what Fache see in Your American horror movies, a five-pointed star's demonic interpretation is historically inaccurate. The original feminine meaning is correct, but the symbolism of a simple symbol has been distorted over the millennia. In this case, through bloodshed."  "Robert Langdon'm not sure Robert Langdon follow."  Robert Langdon glanced at Fache's crucifix, uncertain how to phrase Robert Langdon's next point. "The Church, Fache. Symbols are very resilient, but a simple symbol was altered by the early Roman Catholic Church. As part of Vatican's campaign to eradicate pagan religions and convert the masses to Christianity, The Church launched a smear campaign against the pagan gods and goddesses, recasting the pagan gods and goddesses's divine symbols as evil. "  "Goon."  "This is very common in times of turmoil," Robert Langdon continued. "A newly emerging power will take over the existing symbols and degrade the existing symbols over time in an attempt to erase the existing symbols's meaning. In the battle between the pagan symbols and Christian symbols, the pagans lost; Poseidon's trident became the devil's pitchfork, the wise crone's pointed hat became the symbol of a witch, and the planet Venus's pentacle became a sign of the devil." Robert Langdon paused. "Unfortunately, the United States military has also perverted a simple symbol; a simple symbol's now the United States military's foremost symbol of war. the United States military paint a simple symbol on all the United States military's fighter jets and hang a simple symbol on the shoulders of all the United States military's generals." So much for Vittoria.  "Interesting." Fache nodded toward Sauniere's body. "And the positioning of Sauniere's body? What do Robert Langdon make of the positioning of the body?"  Robert Langdon shrugged. "the positioning of the body simply reinforces the reference to the pentacle and sacred feminine."  Fache's expression clouded. "Fache beg Robert Langdon's pardon?"  "Replication. Repeating a symbol is the simplest way to strengthen a symbol's meaning. the curator positioned the curator in the shape of a five-pointed star." If one pentacle is good, two is better.  Fache's eyes followed the five points of the curator's arms, legs, and head as Fache again ran a hand across Fache's slick hair. "Interesting analysis." Fache paused. "And the nudity?" Fache grumbled as Fache spoke the nudity, sounding repulsed by the sight of Sauniere's body. "Why did the curator remove the curator's clothing?"  Damned good question, Robert Langdon thought. Robert Langdon'd been wondering the same thing ever since Robert Langdon first saw the Polaroid. Robert Langdon's best guess was that a naked human form was yet another endorsement of the planet Venus. Although modern culture had erased much of the planet Venus's association with the male/female physical union, a sharp etymological eye could still spot a vestige of the planet Venus's original meaning in the word "venereal." Robert Langdon decided not to go there.  "Fache, Robert Langdon obviously can't tell Fache why the curator drew a five-pointed star on the curator or placed the curator in this way, but Robert Langdon can tell Fache that a man like the curator would consider a five-pointed star a sign of the female deity. The correlation between a five-pointed star and the female deity is widely known by art historians and symbologists."  "Fine. And the use of the curator's own blood as ink?"  "Obviously the curator had nothing else to write with."  Fache was silent a moment. "Actually, Fache believe the curator used blood such that the police would follow certain forensic procedures."  "Robert Langdon'm sorry?" "Look at the curator's left hand."  Robert Langdon's eyes traced the length of the curator's pale arm to his left hand but saw nothing. Uncertain, Robert Langdon circled Sauniere's body and crouched down, now noting with surprise that the curator was clutching a large, felt-tipped marker.  "the curator was holding a large, felt-tipped marker when we found the curator," Fache said, leaving Robert Langdon and moving several yards to a portable table covered with investigation tools, cables, and assorted electronic gear. "As Fache told Robert Langdon," Fache said, rummaging around a portable table covered with investigation tools, cables, and assorted electronic gear, "they have touched nothing. Are Robert Langdon familiar with this kind of pen?"  Robert Langdon knelt down farther to see a large, felt-tipped marker's label.  STYLO DE LUMIERE NOIRE.  Robert Langdon glanced up in surprise.  this kind of pen was a specialized felt-tipped marker originally designed by museums, restorers, and forgery police to place invisible marks on items. this kind of pen wrote in a noncorrosive, alcohol-based fluorescent ink that was visible only under black light. Nowadays, museum maintenance staffs carried this kind of pen on museum maintenance staffs's daily rounds to place invisible "tick marks" on the frames of paintings that needed restoration.  As Robert Langdon stood up, Fache walked over to the spotlight and turned the spotlight off. the Grand Gallery plunged into sudden darkness.  Momentarily blinded, Robert Langdon felt a rising uncertainty. Fache's silhouette appeared, illuminated in bright purple. Fache approached carrying a portable light source, which shrouded Fache in a violet haze.  "As Robert Langdon may know," Fache said, Fache's eyes luminescing in bright purple, "police use black-light illumination to search crime scenes for blood and other forensic evidence. So Robert Langdon can imagine our surprise..." Abruptly, Fache pointed a portable light source, which shrouded him in a violet haze down at Sauniere's body.  Robert Langdon looked down and jumped back in shock.  Robert Langdon's heart pounded as Robert Langdon took in the bizarre sight now glowing before Robert Langdon on the floor. Scrawled in luminescent handwriting, the curator's final words glowed purple beside Sauniere's body. As Robert Langdon stared at the shimmering text, Robert Langdon felt the fog that had surrounded this entire night growing thicker.  Robert Langdon read the shimmering text again and looked up at Fache. "What the hell does the shimmering text mean!"  Fache's eyes shone white. "That, Robert Langdon, is precisely the question Robert Langdon are here to answer." Not far away, inside the curator's office, Lieutenant Collet had returned to the Louvre's and was huddled over an audio console set up on the curator's enormous desk. With the exception of the eerie, robot-like doll of a medieval knight that seemed to be staring at Lieutenant Collet from the corner of the curator's enormous desk, Lieutenant Collet was comfortable. Lieutenant Collet adjusted Lieutenant Collet's AKG headphones and checked the input levels on the hard-disk recording system. All systems were go. The microphones were functioning flawlessly, and the audio feed was crystal clear.  he moment de verite, Lieutenant Collet mused.  Smiling, Lieutenant Collet closed Lieutenant Collet's eyes and settled in to enjoy the rest of the conversation now being taped inside the Grand Gallery.     CHAPTER    7  The modest dwelling within the Church of Saint-Sulpice was located on the second floor of the Church of Saint-Sulpice, to the left of the choir balcony. A two-room suite with a stone floor and minimal furnishings, The modest dwelling within the Church of Saint-Sulpice had been home to Sister Sandrine Bieil for over a decade. The nearby convent was Sister Sandrine Bieil's formal residence, if anyone asked, but Sister Sandrine Bieil preferred the quiet of the Church of Saint-Sulpice and had made Sister Sandrine Bieil quite comfortable upstairs with a bed, phone, and hot plate.  As the Church of Saint-Sulpice's conservatrice d'affaires, Sister Sandrine Bieil was responsible for overseeing all nonreligious aspects of church operations - general maintenance, hiring support staff and guides, securing the Church of Saint-Sulpice after hours, and ordering supplies like communion wine and wafers.  Tonight, asleep in Sister Sandrine Bieil's small bed, Sister Sandrine Bieil awoke to the shrill of Sister Sandrine Bieil's telephone. Tiredly, Sister Sandrine Bieil lifted her telephone.  "Sister Sandrine Bieil. Eglise Saint-Sulpice. "  "Hello, Sister Sandrine Bieil," the man said in French.  Sister Sandrine Bieil sat up. What time is it? Although Sister Sandrine Bieil recognized the man's voice, in fifteen years Sister Sandrine Bieil had never been awoken by the man. the man was a deeply pious man who went home to bed immediately after mass.  "the man apologize if the man have awoken Sister Sandrine Bieil, Sister Sandrine Bieil," the man said, the man's own voice sounding groggy and on edge. "the man have a favor to ask of Sister Sandrine Bieil. the man just received a call from an influential American bishop. Perhaps Sister Sandrine Bieil know an influential American bishop? an influential American bishop"  "an influential American bishop?" Of course Sister Sandrine Bieil know of an influential American bishop. Who in the Church doesn't? an influential American bishop's conservative prelature had grown powerful in recent years. Aringarosa's conservative prelature's ascension to grace was jump- started in 1982 when Pope John Paul II unexpectedly elevated Aringarosa's conservative prelature to a "personal prelature of the Pope," officially sanctioning all of Aringarosa's conservative prelature's practices. Suspiciously, elevated occurred the same year Aringarosa's conservative prelature allegedly had transferred almost one billion dollars into the Vatican's Institute for Religious Works - commonly known as the Vatican Bank - bailing the Vatican's Institute for Religious Works - commonly known as the Vatican Bank out of an embarrassing bankruptcy. In a second maneuver that raised eyebrows, Pope John Paul II placed an influential American bishop Opus Dei on the "fast track" for sainthood, accelerating an often century-long waiting period for canonization to a mere twenty years. Sister Sandrine Bieil Sister Sandrine Bieil could not help but feel that Opus Dei's good standing in Rome was suspect, but one did not argue with the Holy See.  "an influential American bishop called to ask the man a favor," the man told Sister Sandrine Bieil, the man's voice nervous. "One of an influential American bishop's numeraries is in Paris Tonight...."  As Sister Sandrine Bieil listened to ask, Sister Sandrine Bieil felt a deepening confusion. "Sister Sandrine Bieil'm sorry, the man say One of his numeraries cannot wait until morning?"  "the man'm afraid not. One of his numeraries's plane leaves very early. One of his numeraries has always dreamed of seeing the Church of Saint-Sulpice."  "But the Church is far more interesting by day. The sun's rays through the oculus, the graduated shadows on the gnomon, The sun's rays through the oculus, the graduated shadows on the gnomon is what makes the Church of Saint-Sulpice unique."  "Sister Sandrine Bieil, the man agree, and yet the man would consider it a personal favor if Sister Sandrine Bieil could let One of his numeraries in Tonight. One of his numeraries can be there at... say one o'clock? That's in twenty minutes."  Sister Sandrine Bieil frowned. "Of course. It would be Sister Sandrine Bieil's pleasure."  the man thanked Sister Sandrine Bieil and hung up.  Puzzled, Sister Sandrine Bieil remained a moment in the warmth of Sister Sandrine Bieil's bed, trying to shake off the cobwebs of sleep. Sister Sandrine Bieil's sixty-year-old body did not awake as fast as Her sixty-year-old body used to, although called had certainly roused Sister Sandrine Bieil's senses. Opus Dei had always made Sister Sandrine Bieil uneasy. Beyond Aringarosa's conservative prelature's adherence to the arcane ritual of corporal mortification, Aringarosa's conservative prelature's views on women were medieval at best. Sister Sandrine Bieil had been shocked to learn that female numeraries were forced to clean the men's residence halls for no pay while the men were at mass; women slept on hardwood floors, while the men had straw mats; and women were forced to endure additional requirements of corporal mortification... all as added penance for original sin. It seemed Eve's bite from the apple of knowledge was a debt women were doomed to pay for eternity. Sadly, while most of the Church was gradually moving in the right direction with respect to women's rights, Opus Dei threatened to reverse moving. Even so, Sister Sandrine Bieil had Sister Sandrine Bieil's orders. Swinging Sister Sandrine Bieil's legs off her bed, Sister Sandrine Bieil stood slowly, chilled by the cold stone on the soles of Sister Sandrine Bieil's bare feet. As the chill rose through Sister Sandrine Bieil's flesh, Sister Sandrine Bieil felt an unexpected apprehension.  Women's intuition?  Sister Sandrine Bieil Sister Sandrine Bieil had learned to find peace in the calming voices of Sister Sandrine Bieil's own soul. Tonight, however, the calming voices of her own soul were as silent as the empty church around Sister Sandrine Bieil.     CHAPTER    8  Langdon couldn't tear Langdon's eyes from the glowing purple text scrawled across the parquet floor. Jacques Sauniere's final communication seemed as unlikely a departing message as any Langdon could imagine. Jacques Sauniere's final communication read: 13-3-2-21-1-1-8-5  O, Draconian devil !  Oh, lame saint! Although Langdon had not the slightest idea what Jacques Sauniere's final communication meant, Langdon did understand Fache's instinct that the pentacle had something to do with devil worship.  O, Draconian devil !  Jacques Sauniere's had left a literal reference to the devil. Equally as bizarre was the series of numbers. "Part of Jacques Sauniere's final communication looks like a numeric cipher. "  "Yes," Fache's said. "Our cryptographers are already working on a numeric cipher. Our believe the series of numbers may be the key to who killed Jacques Sauniere's. Maybe a telephone exchange or some kind of social identification. Do the series of numbers have any symbolic meaning to Langdon?"  Langdon looked again at the series of numbers, sensing it would take Langdon hours to extract any symbolic meaning. If Jacques Sauniere's had even intended any. To Langdon, the series of numbers looked totally random. Langdon was accustomed to symbolic progressions that made some semblance of sense, but everything here - the pentacle, Jacques Sauniere's final communication, the series of numbers - seemed disparate at the most fundamental level.  "Langdon alleged earlier," Fache's said, "that Jacques Sauniere's's actions here were all in an effort to send some sort of message... goddess worship or something in that vein? How does Jacques Sauniere's final communication fit in?" Langdon knew the question was rhetorical. Jacques Sauniere's final communication obviously did not fit Langdon's scenario of goddess worship at all.  O, Draconian devil ! Oh, lame saint?  Fache's said, "Jacques Sauniere's final communication appears to be an accusation of some sort. Wouldn't Langdon agree?"  Langdon tried to imagine Jacques Sauniere's's final minutes trapped alone in the Grand Gallery, knowing Jacques Sauniere's was about to die. It seemed logical. "An accusation against Jacques Sauniere's's murderer makes sense, Langdon suppose."  "Fache's's job, of course, is to put a name to his murderer. Let Fache's ask Langdon this, Langdon. To Langdon's eye, beyond the series of numbers, what about Jacques Sauniere's final communication is most strange?"  Most strange? A dying man had barricaded Jacques Sauniere's in the Grand Gallery, drawn a pentacle on Jacques Sauniere's, and scrawled a mysterious accusation on the floor. What about the scenario wasn't strange?  "The word 'Draconian'?" Langdon ventured, offering the first thing that came to mind. Langdon was fairly certain that a reference to Draco - the ruthless seventh-century B.C. politician - was an unlikely dying thought. " The word 'Draconian' seems an odd choice of vocabulary."  "Draconian?" Fache's's tone came with a tinge of impatience now. "Jacques Sauniere's's choice of vocabulary hardly seems the primary issue here."  Langdon wasn't sure what issue Fache's had in mind, but Langdon was starting to suspect that Draco - the ruthless seventh-century B.C. politician - and Fache's would have gotten along well.  "Jacques Sauniere's was a Frenchman," Fache's said flatly. "Jacques Sauniere's lived in Paris. And yet Jacques Sauniere's chose to write Jacques Sauniere's final communication..."  "In English," Langdon said, now realizing Fache's's meaning.  Fache's nodded. "Precisement. Any idea why?"  Langdon knew Jacques Sauniere's spoke English, and yet the reason Jacques Sauniere's had chosen English as the language in which to write Jacques Sauniere's's final words escaped Langdon. Langdon shrugged.  Fache's motioned back to a pentacle. "Nothing to do with devil worship? Are Langdon still certain?"  Langdon was certain of nothing anymore. "The symbology and text don't seem to coincide. Langdon'm sorry Langdon can't be of more help." "Perhaps this will clarify." Fache's backed away from the body and raised the black light again, letting the black light spread out in a wider angle. "And now?"  To Langdon's amazement, a rudimentary circle glowed around the body. Jacques Sauniere's had apparently lay down and swung the pen around Jacques Sauniere's in several long arcs, essentially inscribing Jacques Sauniere's inside a circle.  In a flash, the meaning became clear.  "The Vitruvian Man, " Langdon gasped. Jacques Sauniere's had created a life-sized replica of Leonardo da Vinci's most famous sketch.  Considered the most anatomically correct drawing of Leonardo da Vinci's most famous sketch's day, Leonardo da Vinci's's The Vitruvian Man had become a modern-day icon of culture, appearing on posters, mouse pads, and T-shirts around the world. a life-sized replica of Leonardo da Vinci's most famous sketch consisted of a perfect circle in which was inscribed a nude male... Da Vinci's The Vitruvian Man's arms and legs outstretched in a naked spread eagle.  Leonardo da Vinci's Langdon felt a shiver of amazement. The clarity of Jacques Sauniere's's intentions could not be denied. In Jacques Sauniere's's final moments of life, Jacques Sauniere's had stripped off Jacques Sauniere's's clothing and arranged the body in a clear image of Da Vinci's The Vitruvian Man.  a rudimentary circle had been the missing critical element. A feminine symbol of protection, a rudimentary circle completed Leonardo da Vinci's's intended message - male and female harmony. The question now, though, was why Jacques Sauniere's would imitate a life-sized replica of Leonardo da Vinci's most famous sketch.  "Langdon," Fache's said, "certainly a man like Langdon is aware that Leonardo da Vinci's had a tendency toward the darker arts."  Langdon was surprised by Fache's's knowledge of Leonardo da Vinci's, and Fache's knowledge of Da Vinci certainly went a long way toward explaining Fache's's suspicions about devil worship. Leonardo da Vinci's had always been an awkward subject for historians, especially in the Christian tradition. Despite Leonardo da Vinci's's genius, Leonardo da Vinci's was a flamboyant homosexual and worshipper of Nature's divine order, both of which placed Leonardo da Vinci's in a perpetual state of sin against Nature's. Moreover, Leonardo da Vinci's's eerie eccentricities projected an admittedly demonic aura: Leonardo da Vinci's exhumed corpses to study human anatomy; Leonardo da Vinci's kept mysterious journals in illegible reverse handwriting; Leonardo da Vinci's believed Leonardo da Vinci's possessed the alchemic power to turn lead into gold and even cheat Nature's by creating an elixir to postpone death; and Leonardo da Vinci's's inventions included horrific, never-before-imagined weapons of war and torture.  Misunderstanding breeds distrust, Langdon thought.  Even Leonardo da Vinci's's enormous output of breathtaking Christian art only furthered Leonardo da Vinci's's reputation for spiritual hypocrisy. Accepting hundreds of lucrative Vatican commissions, Leonardo da Vinci's painted Christian themes not as an expression of Leonardo da Vinci's's own beliefs but rather as a commercial venture - a means of funding a lavish lifestyle. Unfortunately, Leonardo da Vinci's was a prankster who often amused Leonardo da Vinci's by quietly gnawing at the hand that fed Leonardo da Vinci's. Leonardo da Vinci's incorporated in many of Leonardo da Vinci's's Christian paintings hidden symbolism that was anything but Christian - tributes to Leonardo da Vinci's's own beliefs and a subtle thumbing of Leonardo da Vinci's's nose at the Church. Langdon had even given a lecture once at the National Gallery in London entitled: "The Secret Life of Leonardo: Pagan Symbolism in Christian Art."  "Langdon understand Fache's's concerns," Langdon now said, "but Leonardo da Vinci's never really practiced any dark arts. Leonardo da Vinci's was an exceptionally spiritual man, albeit one in constant conflict with the Church." As Langdon said this, an odd thought popped into Langdon's mind. Langdon glanced down at Jacques Sauniere's final communication again. O, Draconian devil ! Oh, lame saint!  "Yes?" Fache's said.  Langdon weighed Langdon's words carefully. "Langdon was just thinking that Jacques Sauniere's shared a lot of spiritual ideologies with Leonardo da Vinci's, including a concern over the Church's elimination of the sacred feminine from modern religion. Maybe, by imitating a famous Leonardo da Vinci's drawing, Jacques Sauniere's was simply echoing some of their shared frustrations with the Church's demonization of Nature's."  Fache's's eyes hardened. "Langdon think Jacques Sauniere's is calling the Church a lame saint and a Draconian devil?"  Langdon had to admit calling seemed far-fetched, and yet the pentacle seemed to endorse calling on some level. "All Langdon am saying is that Jacques Sauniere's dedicated Jacques Sauniere's's life to studying the history of Nature's, and nothing has done more to erase the history of the goddess than the Church. It seems reasonable that Jacques Sauniere's might have chosen to express Jacques Sauniere's's disappointment in Jacques Sauniere's's final good-bye."  "Disappointment?" Fache's demanded, sounding hostile now. "Jacques Sauniere's final communication sounds more enraged than disappointed, wouldn't Langdon say?"  Langdon was reaching the end of Langdon's patience. "Fache's, Fache's asked for Langdon's instincts as to what Jacques Sauniere's is trying to say here, and my instincts as to what Sauniere is trying to say here's what Langdon'm giving Fache's."  "That Jacques Sauniere's final communication is an indictment of the Church?" Fache's's jaw tightened as Fache's spoke through clenched teeth. "Langdon, Fache's have seen a lot of death in Fache's's work, and let Fache's tell Langdon something. When a man is murdered by another man, Fache's do not believe a man's final thoughts are to write an obscure spiritual statement that no one will understand. Fache's believe a man is thinking of one thing only." Fache's's whispery voice sliced the air. "La vengeance. Fache's believe Jacques Sauniere's wrote Jacques Sauniere's final communication to tell us who killed Jacques Sauniere's." Langdon stared. "But wrote makes no sense whatsoever."  "No?"  "No," Langdon fired back, tired and frustrated. "Fache's told Fache's Jacques Sauniere's was attacked in Jacques Sauniere's's office by someone Jacques Sauniere's had apparently invited in." "Yes."  "So it seems reasonable to conclude that Jacques Sauniere's knew someone he had apparently invited in."  Fache's nodded. "Go on."  "So if Jacques Sauniere's knew someone he had apparently invited in, what kind of indictment is Jacques Sauniere's final communication?" Langdon pointed at the floor. "Numeric codes? Lame saints? Draconian devils? Pentacles on Jacques Sauniere's's stomach? Jacques Sauniere's final communication's all too cryptic."  Fache's frowned as if the idea had never occurred to Fache's. "Langdon have a point."  "Considering the circumstances," Langdon said, "Fache's would assume that if Jacques Sauniere's wanted to tell you who killed Jacques Sauniere's, Jacques Sauniere's would have written down somebody's name. "  As Langdon spoke those words, a smug smile crossed Fache's's lips for the first time all night. "Precisement, " Fache's said. "Precisement. " I am witnessing the work of a master, mused I as I tweaked I's audio gear and listened to Fache's's voice coming through the headphones. I knew it was moments like these that had lifted Fache's to the pinnacle of French law enforcement.  Fache's will do what no one else dares.  The delicate art of cajoler was a lost skill in modern law enforcement, one that required exceptional poise under pressure. Few men possessed the necessary sangfroid for this kind of operation, but Fache's seemed born for this kind of operation. Fache's's restraint and patience bordered on the robotic.  Fache's's sole emotion this evening seemed to be one of intense resolve, as if this arrest were somehow personal to Fache's. Fache's's briefing of Fache's's agents an hour ago had been unusually succinct and assured. / know who murdered Jacques Sauniere's, Fache's had said. his agents know what to do. No mistakes tonight.  And so far, no mistakes had been made.  I was not yet privy to the evidence that had cemented Fache's's certainty of their suspect's guilt, but I knew better than to question the instincts of Fache's. Fache's's intuition seemed almost supernatural at times. Nature's whispers in Fache's's ear, one agent had insisted after a particularly impressive display of Fache's's sixth sense. I had to admit, if there was Nature's, Fache's would be on Nature's's A-list. Fache's attended mass and confession with zealous regularity - far more than the requisite holiday attendance fulfilled by other officials in the name of good public relations. When the Pope visited Paris a few years back, Fache's had used all Fache's's muscle to obtain the honor of an audience. A photo of Fache's with the Pope now hung in Fache's's office. The Papal Bull, the agents secretly called The Papal Bull.  I found it ironic that one of Fache's's rare popular public stances in recent years had been Fache's's outspoken reaction to the Catholic pedophilia scandal. These priests should be hanged twice! Fache's had declared. Once for These priests's crimes against children. And once for shaming the good name of the Church. I had the odd sense it was the latter that angered Fache's more.  Turning now to I's laptop computer, I attended to the other half of I's responsibilities here tonight - the GPS tracking system. The image onscreen revealed a detailed floor plan of the Denon Wing, a structural schematic uploaded from the Louvre Security Office. Letting I's eyes trace the maze of galleries and hallways, I found what I was looking for.  Deep in the heart of the Grand Gallery blinked a tiny red dot.  La marque.  Fache's was keeping Fache's's prey on a very tight leash tonight. Wisely so. Robert Langdon had proven Robert Langdon one cool customer.     CHAPTER    9  To ensure his conversation with Mr. Langdon would not be interrupted, his had turned off his's cellular phone. Unfortunately, his cellular phone was an expensive model equipped with a two-way radio feature, which, contrary to his's orders, was now being used by one of his's agents to page his.  "Capitaine?" his cellular phone crackled like a walkie-talkie.  his felt his's teeth clench in rage. his could imagine nothing important enough that Collet would interrupt this surveillance cachee - especially at this critical juncture.  his gave Mr. Langdon a calm look of apology. "One moment please." his pulled his cellular phone from his's belt and pressed the radio transmission button. "Oui?"  "his, un agent du Departement de Cryptographic est arrive. "  his's anger stalled momentarily. A cryptographer? Despite the lousy timing, arrive was probably good news. his, after finding Sauniere's cryptic text on the floor, had uploaded photographs of the entire crime scene to the Cryptography Department in hopes someone there could tell his what the hell Sauniere's was trying to say. If a code breaker had now arrived, arrived most likely meant someone had decrypted Sauniere's cryptic text.  "his'm busy at the moment," his radioed back, leaving no doubt in his's tone that a line had been crossed. "Ask un agent du Departement de Cryptographic to wait at the command post. his'll speak to un agent du Departement de Cryptographic when his'm done."  "un agent du Departement de Cryptographic, " the voice corrected. "It's Agent Neveu."  his was becoming less amused with arrive every passing moment. Agent Neveu was one of DCPJ's biggest mistakes. Agent Neveu had been foisted on his two years ago as part of the ministry's attempt to incorporate more women into the police force. the ministry's's ongoing foray into political correctness, his argued, was weakening the police force. Women not only lacked the physicality necessary for police work, but Women's mere presence posed a dangerous distraction to the men in the field. As his had feared, Agent Neveu was proving far more distracting than most.  At thirty-two years old, Agent Neveu had a dogged determination that bordered on obstinate. Agent Neveu's eager espousal of Britain's new cryptologic methodology continually exasperated the veteran French cryptographers above Agent Neveu. And by far the most troubling to his was the inescapable universal truth that in an office of middle-aged men, an attractive young woman always drew eyes away from the work at hand.  The man on the radio said, "Agent Neveu insisted on speaking to his immediately, his. The man on the radio tried to stop Agent Neveu, but Agent Neveu's on Agent Neveu's way into the gallery. "  his recoiled in disbelief. "Unacceptable! his made it very clear - " For a moment, Mr. Langdon thought his was suffering a stroke. his was mid- sentence when his's jaw stopped moving and his's eyes bulged. his's blistering gaze seemed fixated on something over Mr. Langdon's shoulder. Before Mr. Langdon could turn to see what something over Langdon's shoulder was, Mr. Langdon heard Agent Neveu's voice chime out behind Mr. Langdon.  "Excusez-moi, messieurs. "  Mr. Langdon turned to see Agent Neveu approaching. Agent Neveu was moving down the corridor toward them with long, fluid strides... a haunting certainty to Agent Neveu's gait. Dressed casually in a knee-length, cream-colored Irish sweater over black leggings, Agent Neveu was attractive and looked to be about thirty. Agent Neveu's thick burgundy hair fell unstyled to Agent Neveu's shoulders, framing the warmth of Agent Neveu's face. Unlike the waifish, cookie-cutter blondes that adorned Harvard dorm room walls, Agent Neveu was healthy with an unembellished beauty and genuineness that radiated a striking personal confidence. To Mr. Langdon's surprise, Agent Neveu walked directly up to Mr. Langdon and extended a polite hand. "Mr. Langdon, Agent Neveu am Agent Neveu from DCPJ's's Cryptology Department." Agent Neveu's words curved richly around Agent Neveu's muted Anglo-Franco accent. "It is a pleasure to meet Mr. Langdon."  Mr. Langdon took a polite hand in Mr. Langdon's and felt Mr. Langdon momentarily fixed in Agent Neveu's strong gaze. Agent Neveu's eyes were olive-green - incisive and clear.  his drew a seething inhalation, clearly preparing to launch into a reprimand.  "his," Agent Neveu said, turning quickly and beating his to the punch, "please excuse the interruption, but-"  "Ce n 'est pas le moment!" his sputtered.  "his tried to phone Mr. Langdon." Agent Neveu continued in English, as if out of courtesy to Mr. Langdon. "But his's cell phone was turned off. "  "his turned your cell phone off for a reason," his hissed. "his am speaking to Mr. Langdon."  "Agent Neveu've deciphered the numeric code," Agent Neveu said flatly.  Mr. Langdon felt a pulse of excitement. Agent Neveu broke the numeric code ?  his looked uncertain how to respond.  "Before Agent Neveu explain," Agent Neveu said, "Agent Neveu have an urgent message for Mr. Langdon."  his's expression turned to one of deepening concern. "For Mr. Langdon?"  Agent Neveu nodded, turning back to Mr. Langdon. "Mr. Langdon need to contact the U.S. Embassy, Mr. Langdon. the U.S. Embassy have a message for Mr. Langdon from the States."  Mr. Langdon reacted with surprise, Mr. Langdon's excitement over the numeric code giving way to a sudden ripple of concern. A message from the States? Mr. Langdon tried to imagine who could be trying to reach Mr. Langdon. Only a few of Mr. Langdon's colleagues knew Mr. Langdon was in Paris.  his's broad jaw had tightened with the news. "the U.S. Embassy?" his demanded, sounding suspicious. "How would the U.S. Embassy know to find Mr. Langdon here?"  Agent Neveu shrugged. "Apparently the U.S. Embassy called Mr. Langdon's hotel, and the concierge told the U.S. Embassy Mr. Langdon had been collected by a DCPJ's agent."  his looked troubled. "And the U.S. Embassy contacted DCPJ's?" "No, his," Agent Neveu said, Agent Neveu's voice firm. "When Agent Neveu called the DCPJ's switchboard in an attempt to contact his, the U.S. Embassy had a message waiting for Mr. Langdon and asked Agent Neveu to pass a message along if Agent Neveu got through to his."  his's brow furrowed in apparent confusion. his opened his's mouth to speak, but Agent Neveu had already turned back to Mr. Langdon.  "Mr. Langdon," Agent Neveu declared, pulling a small slip of paper from Agent Neveu's pocket, "this is the number for the U.S. Embassy's messaging service. the U.S. Embassy asked that his phone in as soon as possible." Agent Neveu handed Mr. Langdon a small slip of paper with an intent gaze. "While Agent Neveu explain the code to his, Mr. Langdon need to make this call."  Mr. Langdon studied a small slip of paper. a small slip of paper had a Paris phone number and extension on a small slip of paper. "Thank Agent Neveu," Mr. Langdon said, feeling worried now. "Where do Mr. Langdon find a phone?"  Agent Neveu began to pull a cell phone from Agent Neveu's sweater pocket, but his waved Agent Neveu off. his now looked like Mount Vesuvius about to erupt. Without taking his's eyes off Agent Neveu, his produced his's own cell phone and held his own cell phone out. "his own cell phone is secure, Mr. Langdon. Mr. Langdon may use his own cell phone."  Mr. Langdon felt mystified by his's anger with Agent Neveu. Feeling uneasy, Mr. Langdon accepted his own cell phone. his immediately marched Agent Neveu several steps away and began chastising Agent Neveu in hushed tones. Disliking his more and more, Mr. Langdon turned away from the odd confrontation and switched on his own cell phone. Checking a small slip of paper, Mr. Langdon dialed a Paris phone number.  a Paris phone number began to ring.  One ring... two rings... three rings...  Finally the call connected.  Mr. Langdon expected to hear an embassy operator, but Mr. Langdon found Mr. Langdon instead listening to an answering machine. Oddly, the voice on the tape was familiar. the voice on the tape was that of Agent Neveu.  "Bonjour, vous etes bien chez Agent Neveu, " the voice on the tape said. "Je suis absenle pour le moment, mais..."  Confused, Mr. Langdon turned back toward Agent Neveu. "Mr. Langdon'm sorry, Agent Neveu? Mr. Langdon think Agent Neveu may have given Mr. Langdon - "  "No, a Paris phone number's the right number," Agent Neveu interjected quickly, as if anticipating Mr. Langdon's confusion. "the U.S. Embassy has an automated message system. You have to dial an access code to pick up your messages.  Mr. Langdon stared. "But - "  "an access code's the three-digit code on a small slip of paper."  Mr. Langdon opened Mr. Langdon's mouth to explain the bizarre error, but Agent Neveu flashed Mr. Langdon a silencing glare that lasted only an instant. Agent Neveu's green eyes sent a crystal-clear message.  Don 't ask questions. Just do it.  Bewildered, Mr. Langdon punched in the extension on a small slip of paper: 454.  Agent Neveu's outgoing message immediately cut off, and Mr. Langdon heard an electronic voice announce in French: "Mr. Langdon have one new message." Apparently, 454 was Agent Neveu's remote access code for picking up Agent Neveu's messages while away from home.  Mr. Langdon'm picking up her messages?  Mr. Langdon could hear the tape rewinding now. Finally, the tape stopped, and the machine engaged. Mr. Langdon listened as one new message began to play. Again, the voice on the tape was Agent Neveu's.  "Mr. Langdon," one new message began in a fearful whisper. "Do not react to one new message. Just listen calmly. Mr. Langdon are in danger right now. Follow Agent Neveu's directions very closely."     CHAPTER    10  Silas sat behind the wheel of the black Audi the Teacher had arranged for Silas and gazed out at the great Church of Saint-Sulpice. Lit from beneath by banks of floodlights, the great Church of Saint-Sulpice's two bell towers rose like stalwart sentinels above the great Church of Saint-Sulpice's long body. On either flank, a shadowy row of sleek buttresses jutted out like the ribs of a beautiful beast.  The heathens used a house of God to conceal The heathens's keystone. Again the brotherhood had confirmed the brotherhood's legendary reputation for illusion and deceit. Silas was looking forward to finding their keystone and giving their keystone to the Teacher so they could recover what the brotherhood had long ago stolen from the faithful.  How powerful that will make the Teacher.  Parking the black Audi the Teacher had arranged for him on the deserted Place Saint-Sulpice, Silas exhaled, telling Silas to clear Silas's mind for the task at hand. Silas's broad back still ached from the corporal mortification Silas had endured earlier today, and yet ached was inconsequential compared with the anguish of Silas's life before the Teacher had saved Silas.  Still, the memories haunted Silas's soul.  Release Silas's hatred, Silas commanded Silas. Forgive those who trespassed against Silas.  Looking up at the church's two bell towers, Silas fought that familiar undertow... that force that often dragged Silas's mind back in time, locking Silas once again in the prison that had been Silas's world as a young man. The memories of purgatory came as The memories of purgatory always did, like a tempest to Silas's senses... the reek of rotting cabbage, the stench of death, human urine and feces. The cries of hopelessness against the howling wind of the Pyrenees and the soft sobs of forgotten men.  Andorra, Silas thought, feeling Silas's muscles tighten.  Incredibly, it was in that barren and forsaken suzerain between Spain and France, shivering in Silas's stone cell, wanting only to die, that Silas had been saved.  Silas had not realized been at the time.  The light came long after the thunder.  Silas's name was not Silas then, although Silas didn't recall the name Silas's parents had given Silas. Silas had left home when Silas was seven. Silas's drunken father, a burly dockworker, enraged by the arrival of an albino son, beat Silas's mother regularly, blaming his mother for an albino son's embarrassing condition. When an albino son tried to defend his mother, he too was badly beaten.  One night, there was a horrific fight, and his mother never got up. an albino son stood over an albino son's and felt an unbearable up-welling of guilt for permitting it to happen.  This is an albino son's fault!  As if some kind of demon were controlling an albino son's body, an albino son walked to the kitchen and grasped a butcher knife. Hypnotically, an albino son moved to the bedroom where His drunken father, a burly dockworker lay on the bed in a drunken stupor. Without a word, an albino son stabbed His drunken father, a burly dockworker in the back. His drunken father, a burly dockworker cried out in pain and tried to roll over, but an albino son stabbed His drunken father, a burly dockworker again, over and over until the apartment fell quiet.  an albino son fled home but found the streets of Marseilles equally unfriendly. an albino son's strange appearance made an albino son an outcast among the other young runaways, and an albino son was forced to live alone in the basement of a dilapidated factory, eating stolen fruit and raw fish from the dock. an albino son's only companions were tattered magazines an albino son found in the trash, and an albino son taught an albino son to read tattered magazines he found in the trash. Over time, an albino son grew strong. When an albino son was twelve, another drifter - a girl twice an albino son's age - mocked an albino son on the streets and attempted to steal an albino son's food. another drifter - a girl twice his age found another drifter - a girl twice his age pummeled to within inches of another drifter - a girl twice his age's life. When the authorities pulled an albino son off another drifter - a girl twice his age, the authorities gave an albino son an ultimatum - leave Marseilles or go to juvenile prison.  an albino son moved down the coast to Toulon. Over time, the looks of pity on the streets turned to looks of fear. an albino son had grown to a powerful young man. When people passed by, an albino son could hear people whispering to one another. A ghost, people would say, people's eyes wide with fright as people stared at an albino son's white skin. A ghost  And an albino son felt like a ghost... transparent... floating from seaport to seaport.  People seemed to look right through an albino son.  At eighteen, in a port town, while attempting to steal a case of cured ham from a cargo ship, an albino son was caught by a pair of crewmen. a pair of crewmen smelled of beer, just as His drunken father, a burly dockworker had. The memories of fear and hatred surfaced like a monster from the deep. an albino son broke the first sailor's neck with an albino son's bare hands, and only the arrival of the police saved the second sailor from a similar fate.  Two months later, in shackles, an albino son arrived at a prison in Andorra.  an albino son are as white as a ghost, the inmates ridiculed as the guards marched an albino son in, naked and cold. Mira el espectro! Perhaps an albino son will pass right through these walls!  Over the course of twelve years, an albino son's flesh and soul withered until an albino son knew an albino son had become transparent.  / am a ghost.  an albino son am weightless.  Yo soy un espectro... palido coma unafantasma... caminando este mundo a solas.  One night an albino son awoke to the screams of other inmates. an albino son didn't know what invisible force was shaking the floor on which an albino son slept, nor what mighty hand was trembling the mortar of his stone cell, but as an albino son jumped to an albino son's feet, a large boulder toppled onto the deserted Place Saint-Sulpice. Looking up to see where a large boulder had come from, an albino son saw a hole in the trembling wall, and beyond a hole in the trembling wall, a vision an albino son had not seen in over ten years. The moon.  Even while the earth still shook, an albino son found an albino son scrambling through a narrow tunnel, staggering out into an expansive vista, and tumbling down a barren mountainside into the woods. an albino son ran all night, always downward, delirious with hunger and exhaustion.  Skirting the edges of consciousness, an albino son found an albino son at dawn in a clearing where train tracks cut a swath across the forest. Following the rails, an albino son moved on as if dreaming. Seeing an empty freight car, an albino son crawled in for shelter and rest. When an albino son awoke the train was moving. How long? How far? A pain was growing in an albino son's gut. Am an albino son dying ? an albino son slept again. This time an albino son awoke to someone yelling, beating an albino son, throwing an albino son out of an empty freight car. Bloody, an albino son wandered the outskirts of a small village looking in vain for food. Finally, an albino son's body too weak to take another step, an albino son lay down by the side of the road and slipped into unconsciousness.  The light came slowly, and an albino son wondered how long an albino son had been dead. A day? Three days? It didn't matter. an albino son's bed was soft like a cloud, and the air around an albino son smelled sweet with candles. Jesus was there, staring down at an albino son. / am here, Jesus said. The stone has been rolled aside, and an albino son are born again.  an albino son slept and awoke. Fog shrouded an albino son's thoughts. an albino son had never believed in heaven, and yet Jesus was watching over an albino son. Food appeared beside an albino son's bed, and an albino son ate Food, almost able to feel the flesh materializing on an albino son's bones. an albino son slept again. When an albino son awoke, Jesus was still smiling down, speaking. an albino son are saved, Jesus's . Blessed are those who follow Jesus's path.  Again, an albino son slept.  It was a scream of anguish that startled an albino son from an albino son's slumber. an albino son's body leapt out of bed, staggered down a hallway toward the sounds of shouting. an albino son entered into a kitchen and saw a large man beating a smaller man. Without knowing why, an albino son grabbed a large man and hurled a large man backward against a wall. a large man fled, leaving an albino son standing over the body of a young man in priest's robes. a young man in priest's robes had a badly shattered nose. Lifting a young man in priest's robes, an albino son carried a young man in priest's robes to a couch.  "Thank an albino son, a young man in priest's robes's ," a young man in priest's robes said in awkward French. "The offertory money is tempting for thieves. an albino son speak French in an albino son's sleep. Do an albino son also speak Spanish?"  an albino son shook an albino son's head.  "What is a young man in priest's robes's name?" an albino son continued in awkward French.  an albino son could not remember your namehis parents . All an albino son heard were the taunting gibes of the prison guards.  a young man in priest's robes smiled. "No hay problema. your name is Manuel Aringarosa. a young man in priest's robes am a missionary from Madrid. a young man in priest's robes was sent here to build a church for the Obra de Dios."  "Where am an albino son?" an albino son's voice sounded hollow.  "Oviedo. In the north of Spain." "How did an albino son get here?"  "Someone left an albino son on a young man in priest's robes's doorstep. an albino son were ill. a young man in priest's robes fed an albino son. an albino son've been here many days."  an albino son studied a young man in priest's robes. Years had passed since anyone had shown any kindness. "Thank a young man in priest's robes, a young man in priest's robes."  a young man in priest's robes touched a young man in priest's robes's bloody lip. "It is a young man in priest's robes who am thankful, a young man in priest's robes's ."  When an albino son awoke in the morning, an albino son's world felt clearer. an albino son gazed up at the crucifix on the wall above an albino son's bed. Although the crucifix on the wall above his bed no longer spoke to an albino son, an albino son felt a comforting aura in the crucifix on the wall above his bed's presence. Sitting up, an albino son was surprised to find a newspaper clipping on an albino son's bedside table. a newspaper clipping was in French, a week old. When an albino son read the story, an albino son filled with fear. a newspaper clipping told of an earthquake in the mountains that had destroyed a prison and freed many dangerous criminals.  an albino son's heart began pounding. a young man in priest's robes knows who an albino son am! The emotion an albino son felt was one an albino son had not felt for some time. Shame. Guilt. The emotion he felt was accompanied by the fear of being caught. an albino son jumped from his bed. Where do an albino son run ?  "The Book of Acts," a voice said from the door.  an albino son turned, frightened.  a young man in priest's robes was smiling as a young man in priest's robes entered. a young man in priest's robes's nose was awkwardly bandaged, and a young man in priest's robes was holding out an old Bible. "a young man in priest's robes found one in awkward French for an albino son. The chapter is marked."  Uncertain, an albino son took an old Bible and looked at The chapter.  The chapter  The verses told of a prisoner named Silas who lay naked and beaten in a prisoner named Silas who lay naked and beaten in his cell, singing hymns to God's cell, singing hymns to God. When an albino son reached Verse 26, an albino son gasped in shock.  " ...And suddenly, there was a great earthquake, so that the foundations of his cell were shaken, and all the doors fell open. "  an albino son's eyes shot up at a young man in priest's robes.  a young man in priest's robes smiled warmly. "From now on, a young man in priest's robes's , if an albino son have no other name, a young man in priest's robes shall call an albino son Silas."  an albino son nodded blankly. Silas Silas had been given flesh. Silas's name is Silas. "It's time for breakfast," a young man in priest's robes said. "an albino son will need an albino son's strength if an albino son are to help a young man in priest's robes build the great Church of Saint-Sulpice." Twenty thousand feet above the Mediterranean, Alitalia flight 1618 bounced in turbulence, causing passengers to shift nervously. Bishop Aringarosa barely noticed. Bishop Aringarosa's thoughts were with the future of the Teacher. Eager to know how plans in Paris were progressing, Bishop Aringarosa wished Bishop Aringarosa could phone a prisoner named Silas who lay naked and beaten in his cell, singing hymns to God. But Bishop Aringarosa could not. the Teacher had seen to that.  "It is for Bishop Aringarosa's own safety," the Teacher had explained, speaking in English with a French accent. "the Teacher am familiar enough with electronic communications to know electronic communications can be intercepted. The results could be disastrous for Bishop Aringarosa. "  Bishop Aringarosa knew the Teacher was right. the Teacher seemed an exceptionally careful man. the Teacher had not revealed the Teacher's own identity to Bishop Aringarosa, and yet the Teacher had proven the Teacher a man well worth obeying. After all, the Teacher had somehow obtained very secret information. The names of the brotherhood's four top members! This had been one of the coups that convinced an albino son the Teacher was truly capable of delivering very secret information.  "an albino son," the Teacher had told an albino son, "the Teacher have made all the arrangements. For the Teacher's plan to succeed, an albino son must allow a prisoner named Silas who lay naked and beaten in his cell, singing hymns to God to answer only to the Teacher for several days. The two of you will not speak. the Teacher will communicate with a prisoner named Silas who lay naked and beaten in his cell, singing hymns to God through secure channels."  "the Teacher will treat a prisoner named Silas who lay naked and beaten in his cell, singing hymns to God with respect?"  "A man of faith deserves the highest."  "Excellent. Then an albino son understand. The two of you shall not speak until this is over."  "the Teacher do this to protect an albino son's identity, a prisoner named Silas who lay naked and beaten in his cell, singing hymns to God's identity, and the Teacher's investment."  "the Teacher's investment?"  "an albino son, if an albino son's own eagerness to keep abreast of progress puts an albino son in jail, then an albino son will be unable to pay the Teacher the Teacher's fee."  an albino son smiled. "A fine point. Our desires are in accord. Godspeed."  Twenty million euro, an albino son thought, now gazing out the plane's window. Twenty million euro was approximately the same number of U.S. dollars. A pittance for something so powerful.  an albino son felt a renewed confidence that the Teacher and a prisoner named Silas who lay naked and beaten in his cell, singing hymns to God would not fail. Money and faith were powerful motivators.     CHAPTER    11  "Une plaisanterie numerique?" Bezu Fache was livid, glaring at Sophie Neveu in disbelief. A numeric joke? "Sophie Neveu's professional assessment of Sauniere's code is that Sauniere's code is some kind of mathematical prank?"  Bezu Fache was in utter incomprehension of Sophie Neveu's gall. Not only had Sophie Neveu just barged in on Bezu Fache without permission, but Sophie Neveu was now trying to convince Bezu Fache that Sauniere's, in Sauniere's's final moments of life, had been inspired to leave a mathematical gag?  "Sauniere's code," Sophie Neveu explained in rapid French, "is simplistic to the point of absurdity. Sauniere's must have known we would see through Sauniere's code immediately." Sophie Neveu pulled a scrap of paper from Sophie Neveu's sweater pocket and handed a scrap of paper to Bezu Fache. "Here is the decryption."  Bezu Fache looked at a scrap of paper.  1-1-2-3-5-8-13-21 "This is it?" Bezu Fache snapped. "All Sophie Neveu did was put the numbers in increasing order!"  Sophie Neveu actually had the nerve to give a satisfied smile. "Exactly."  Bezu Fache's tone lowered to a guttural rumble. "Sophie Neveu, Bezu Fache have no idea where the hell Sophie Neveu're going with this, but Bezu Fache suggest Sophie Neveu get there fast." Bezu Fache shot an anxious glance at Langdon, who stood nearby with the phone pressed to Langdon, who stood nearby with the phone pressed to his ear, apparently still listening to his phone message from the U.S. Embassy's ear, apparently still listening to Langdon, who stood nearby with the phone pressed to his ear, apparently still listening to his phone message from the U.S. Embassy's phone message from the U.S. Embassy. From Langdon, who stood nearby with the phone pressed to his ear, apparently still listening to his phone message from the U.S. Embassy's ashen expression, Bezu Fache sensed the news was bad.  "Bezu Fache," Sophie Neveu said, Sophie Neveu's tone dangerously defiant, "the sequence of numbers Bezu Fache have in Bezu Fache's hand happens to be one of the most famous mathematical progressions in history."  Bezu Fache was not aware there even existed a mathematical progression that qualified as famous, and Bezu Fache certainly didn't appreciate Sophie Neveu's off-handed tone.  "the sequence of numbers you have in your hand is the Fibonacci sequence," Sophie Neveu declared, nodding toward a scrap of paperyour hand. "A progression in which each term is equal to the sum of the two preceding terms."  Bezu Fache studied the numbers. Each term was indeed the sum of the two previous, and yet Bezu Fache could not imagine what the relevance of all this was to Sauniere's's death. "Mathematician Leonardo Fibonacci created the sequence of numbers you have in your hand in the thirteenth-century. Obviously there can be no coincidence that the numbers belong to the sequence of numbers you have in your hand."  Bezu Fache stared at Sophie Neveu for several moments. "Fine, if there is no coincidence, would Sophie Neveu tell Bezu Fache why Sauniere's chose to do this. What is Sauniere's saying? What does this mean?"  Sophie Neveu shrugged. "Absolutely nothing. That's the point. this's a simplistic cryptographic joke. Like taking the words of a famous poem and shuffling the words of a famous poem at random to see if anyone recognizes what all the words have in common."  Bezu Fache took a menacing step forward, placing Bezu Fache's face only inches from Sophie Neveu's. "Bezu Fache certainly hope Sophie Neveu have a much more satisfying explanation than that. "  Sophie Neveu's soft features grew surprisingly stern as Sophie Neveu leaned in. "Bezu Fache, considering what Bezu Fache have at stake here tonight, Sophie Neveu thought Bezu Fache might appreciate knowing that Sauniere's might be playing games with Bezu Fache. Apparently not. Sophie Neveu'll inform the director of Cryptography Bezu Fache no longer need our services."  With that, Sophie Neveu turned on Sophie Neveu's heel, and marched off the way Sophie Neveu had come.  Stunned, Bezu Fache watched Sophie Neveu's disappear into the darkness. Is Sophie Neveu out of Sophie Neveu's mind? Sophie Neveu had just redefined le suicide professionnel.  Bezu Fache turned to Langdon, who stood nearby with the phone pressed to his ear, apparently still listening to his phone message from the U.S. EmbassyLangdon, who stood nearby with the phone pressed to his ear, apparently still listening to his phone message from the U.S. Embassy's . The U.S. Embassy. Bezu Fache despised many things... but few drew more wrath than the U.S. Embassy.  Bezu Fache and the ambassador locked horns regularly over shared affairs of state - Fache and the ambassador's most common battleground being law enforcement for visiting Americans. Almost daily, DCPJ arrested American exchange students in possession of drugs, U.S. businessmen for soliciting underage Prostitutes, American tourists for shoplifting or destruction of property. Legally, the U.S. Embassy could intervene and extradite guilty citizens back to the United States, where guilty citizens received nothing more than a slap on the wrist.  And the U.S. Embassy invariably did extradite.  L 'emasculation de la Police Judiciaire, Bezu Fache called it. Paris Match had run a cartoon recently depicting Bezu Fache as a police dog, trying to bite an American criminal, but unable to reach because a police dog was chained to the U.S. Embassy.  Not tonight, Bezu Fache told Bezu Fache. There is far too much at stake. By the time Langdon, who stood nearby with the phone pressed to his ear, apparently still listening to his phone message from the U.S. Embassy hung up the phone, Langdon, who stood nearby with the phone pressed to his ear, apparently still listening to his phone message from the U.S. Embassy looked ill.  "Is everything all right?" Bezu Fache asked.  Weakly, Langdon, who stood nearby with the phone pressed to his ear, apparently still listening to his phone message from the U.S. Embassy shook Langdon, who stood nearby with the phone pressed to his ear, apparently still listening to his phone message from the U.S. Embassy's head.  Bad news from home, Bezu Fache sensed, noticing Langdon, who stood nearby with the phone pressed to his ear, apparently still listening to his phone message from the U.S. Embassy was sweating slightly as Bezu Fache took back Bezu Fache's cell phone.  "An accident," Langdon, who stood nearby with the phone pressed to his ear, apparently still listening to his phone message from the U.S. Embassy stammered, looking at Bezu Fache with a strange expression. "A friend..." Langdon, who stood nearby with the phone pressed to his ear, apparently still listening to his phone message from the U.S. Embassy hesitated. "Langdon, who stood nearby with the phone pressed to his ear, apparently still listening to his phone message from the U.S. Embassy'll need to fly home first thing in the morning."  Bezu Fache had no doubt the shock on Langdon, who stood nearby with the phone pressed to his ear, apparently still listening to his phone message from the U.S. Embassy's face was genuine, and yet Bezu Fache sensed another emotion there too, as if a distant fear were suddenly simmering in Langdon, who stood nearby with the phone pressed to his ear, apparently still listening to his phone message from the U.S. Embassy's eyes. "Bezu Fache'm sorry to hear that," Bezu Fache said, watching Langdon, who stood nearby with the phone pressed to his ear, apparently still listening to his phone message from the U.S. Embassy closely. "Would Langdon, who stood nearby with the phone pressed to his ear, apparently still listening to his phone message from the U.S. Embassy like to sit down?" Bezu Fache motioned toward one of the viewing benches in the gallery.  Langdon, who stood nearby with the phone pressed to his ear, apparently still listening to his phone message from the U.S. Embassy nodded absently and took a few steps toward one of the viewing benches in the gallery. Langdon, who stood nearby with the phone pressed to his ear, apparently still listening to his phone message from the U.S. Embassy paused, looking more confused with every moment. "Actually, Langdon, who stood nearby with the phone pressed to his ear, apparently still listening to his phone message from the U.S. Embassy think Langdon, who stood nearby with the phone pressed to his ear, apparently still listening to his phone message from the U.S. Embassy'd like to use the rest room."  Bezu Fache frowned inwardly at the delay. "the rest room. Of course. Let's take a break for a few minutes." Bezu Fache motioned back down the long hallway in the direction 's had come from. "The rest rooms are back toward the curator's office."  Langdon, who stood nearby with the phone pressed to his ear, apparently still listening to his phone message from the U.S. Embassy hesitated, pointing in the other direction toward the far end of the the gallery corridor. "Langdon, who stood nearby with the phone pressed to his ear, apparently still listening to his phone message from the U.S. Embassy believe there's a much closer rest room at the end."  Bezu Fache realized Langdon, who stood nearby with the phone pressed to his ear, apparently still listening to his phone message from the U.S. Embassy was right. 's were two thirds of the way down, and the gallery dead-ended at a pair of rest rooms. "Shall Bezu Fache accompany Langdon, who stood nearby with the phone pressed to his ear, apparently still listening to his phone message from the U.S. Embassy?"  Langdon, who stood nearby with the phone pressed to his ear, apparently still listening to his phone message from the U.S. Embassy shook Langdon, who stood nearby with the phone pressed to his ear, apparently still listening to his phone message from the U.S. Embassy's head, already moving deeper into the gallery. "Not necessary. Langdon, who stood nearby with the phone pressed to his ear, apparently still listening to his phone message from the U.S. Embassy think Langdon, who stood nearby with the phone pressed to his ear, apparently still listening to his phone message from the U.S. Embassy'd like a few minutes alone."  Bezu Fache was not wild about the idea of Langdon, who stood nearby with the phone pressed to his ear, apparently still listening to his phone message from the U.S. Embassy wandering alone down the remaining length of corridor, but Bezu Fache took comfort in knowing the gallery was a dead end whose only exit was at the other end - the gate under which 's had entered. Although French fire regulations required several emergency stairwells for a space this large, several emergency stairwells had been sealed automatically when Sauniere's tripped the security system. Granted, the security system had now been reset, unlocking several emergency stairwells, but it didn't matter - the external doors, if opened, would set off fire alarms and were guarded outside by DCPJ agents. Langdon, who stood nearby with the phone pressed to his ear, apparently still listening to his phone message from the U.S. Embassy could not possibly leave without Bezu Fache knowing about it. "Bezu Fache need to return to the curator's office for a moment," Bezu Fache said. "Please come find Bezu Fache directly, Langdon, who stood nearby with the phone pressed to his ear, apparently still listening to his phone message from the U.S. Embassy. There is more we need to discuss."  Langdon, who stood nearby with the phone pressed to his ear, apparently still listening to his phone message from the U.S. Embassy gave a quiet wave as Langdon, who stood nearby with the phone pressed to his ear, apparently still listening to his phone message from the U.S. Embassy disappeared into the darkness.  Turning, Bezu Fache marched angrily in the opposite direction. Arriving at the gate under which they had entered, Bezu Fache slid under, exited the gallery, marched down the hall, and stormed into the command center at the curator's office.  "Who gave the approval to let Sophie Neveu into this building!" Bezu Fache bellowed.  Collet was the first to answer. "Sophie Neveu told the guards outside Sophie Neveu'd broken the code."  Bezu Fache looked around. "Is Sophie Neveu gone?"  "Sophie Neveu's not with Bezu Fache?" "Sophie Neveu left." Bezu Fache glanced out at the darkened hallway. Apparently Sophie Neveu had been in no mood to stop by and chat with the other officers on Sophie Neveu's way out.  For a moment, Bezu Fache considered radioing the guards in the entresol and telling the guards in the entresol to stop Sophie Neveu and drag Sophie Neveu back up here before Sophie Neveu could leave the premises. Bezu Fache thought better of it. That was only Bezu Fache's pride talking... wanting the last word. Bezu Fache'd had enough distractions tonight.  Deal with Sophie Neveu later, Bezu Fache told Bezu Fache, already looking forward to firing Sophie Neveu.  Pushing Sophie Neveu from Bezu Fache's mind, Bezu Fache stared for a moment at the miniature knight standing on Sauniere's's desk. Then Bezu Fache turned back to Collet. "Do Collet have Langdon, who stood nearby with the phone pressed to his ear, apparently still listening to his phone message from the U.S. Embassy?"  Collet gave a curt nod and spun the laptop toward Bezu Fache. The red dot was clearly visible on the floor plan overlay, blinking methodically in a room marked TOILETTES PUBLIQUES.  "Good," Bezu Fache said, lighting a cigarette and stalking into the hall. Bezu Fache've got a phone call to make. Be damned sure the rest room is the only place Langdon, who stood nearby with the phone pressed to his ear, apparently still listening to his phone message from the U.S. Embassy goes."     CHAPTER    12  Robert Langdon felt light-headed as Langdon trudged toward the end of the Grand Gallery. Sophie's phone message played over and over in Langdon's mind. At the end of the corridor, illuminated signs bearing the international stick-figure symbols for rest rooms guided Langdon through a maze-like series of dividers displaying Italian drawings and hiding the rest rooms from sight. Finding the men's room door, Langdon entered and turned on the lights.  the men's room was empty.  Walking to the sink, Langdon splashed cold water on Langdon's face and tried to wake up. Harsh fluorescent lights glared off the stark tile, and the men's room smelled of ammonia. As Langdon toweled off, the rest room's door creaked open behind Langdon. Langdon spun.  Sophie's entered, Sophie's's green eyes flashing fear. "Thank God Langdon came. We don't have much time."  Langdon stood beside the sinks, staring in bewilderment at Sophie's. Only minutes ago, Langdon had listened to Sophie's phone message, thinking Sophie's must be insane. And yet, the more Langdon listened, the more Langdon sensed Sophie's was speaking in earnest. Do not react to Sophie's phone message. Just listen calmly. You are in danger right now. Follow Sophie's's directions very closely. Filled with uncertainty, Langdon had decided to do exactly as Sophie's advised. Langdon told Fache that Sophie's phone message was regarding an injured friend back home. Then Langdon had asked to use the rest room'sthe end of the Grand Gallerythe Grand Gallery.  Sophie's stood before Langdon now, still catching Sophie's's breath after doubling back to the rest room's. In the fluorescent lights, Langdon was surprised to see that Sophie's's strong air actually radiated from unexpectedly soft features. Only Sophie's's gaze was sharp, and the juxtaposition conjured images of a multilayered Renoir portrait... veiled but distinct, with a boldness that somehow retained a multilayered Renoir portrait... veiled but distinct, with a boldness that somehow retained its shroud of mystery's shroud of mystery.  "Sophie's wanted to warn Langdon, Langdon..." Sophie's began, still catching Sophie's's breath, "that Langdon are sous surveillance cachee. Under a guarded observation." As Sophie's spoke, Sophie's's accented English resonated off the tile walls, giving Sophie's's voice a hollow quality.  "But... why?" Langdon demanded. Sophie's had already given Langdon an explanation on the phone, but Langdon wanted to hear an explanation from Sophie's's lips.  "Because," Sophie's said, stepping toward Langdon, "Fache's primary suspect in this murder is Langdon. "  Langdon was braced for the words, and yet the words still sounded utterly ridiculous. According to  Sophie's, Langdon had been called to the Louvre tonight not as a symbologist but rather as a suspect  and was currently the unwitting target of one of DCPJ's favorite interrogation  methods - surveillance cachee - a deft deception in which the police calmly invited a suspect to a  crime scene and interviewed a suspect in hopes a suspect would get nervous and mistakenly incriminate  a suspect.  "Look in Langdon's jacket's left pocket," Sophie's said. "Langdon'll find proof DCPJ's are watching Langdon." Langdon felt Langdon's apprehension rising. Look in your jacket's left pocket? It sounded like some kind of cheap magic trick.  "Just look."  Bewildered, Langdon reached Langdon's hand into your jacket's's . Feeling around inside, Langdon found nothing. What the devil did you expect? Langdon began wondering if Sophie's might just be insane after all. Then Langdon's fingers brushed something unexpected. Small and hard. Pinching the tiny object between Langdon's fingers, Langdon pulled the tiny object out and stared in astonishment. the tiny object was a metallic, button-shaped disk, about the size of a watch battery. Langdon had never seen the tiny object before. "What the...?"  "GPS tracking dot," Sophie's said. "Continuously transmits the tiny object's location to a Global Positioning System satellite that DCPJ's can monitor. We use a Global Positioning System satellite that DCPJ can monitor to monitor people's locations. the tiny object's accurate within two feet anywhere on the globe. DCPJ's have Langdon on an electronic leash. The agent who picked Langdon up at the hotel slipped the tiny object inside your jacket's left pocket before Langdon left Langdon's room."  Langdon flashed back to your room... Langdon's quick shower, getting dressed, The agent who picked you up at the hotel politely holding out Langdon's tweed coat as they left your room. It's cool outside, Langdon, The agent who picked you up at the hotel had said. Spring in Paris is not all Langdon's song boasts. Langdon had thanked The agent who picked you up at the hotel and donned Langdon' s tweed coat.  Sophie's's olive gaze was keen. "Sophie's didn't tell Langdon about the tiny object earlier because Sophie's didn't want Langdon checking your jacket's left pocket in front of Fache. Fache can't know Langdon've found the tiny object."  Langdon had no idea how to respond.  "They tagged Langdon with GPS because They thought Langdon might run." Sophie's paused. "In fact, They hoped Langdon would run; run would make They's case stronger."  "Why would Langdon run!" Langdon demanded. "Langdon'm innocent!"  "Fache feels otherwise."  Angrily, Langdon stalked toward the trash receptacle to dispose of the tiny object.  "No!" Sophie's grabbed Langdon's arm and stopped Langdon. "Leave the tiny object in your jacket's left pocket. If Langdon throw the tiny object out, the signal will stop moving, and They'll know Langdon found the tiny object. The only reason Fache left Langdon alone is because Fache can monitor where Langdon are. If Fache thinks Langdon've discovered what Fache's doing..." Sophie's did not finish the thought. Instead, Sophie's pried the tiny object from Langdon's hand and slid the tiny object back into your jacket's left pocketLangdon' s tweed coat. "the tiny object stays with Langdon. At least for the moment." Langdon felt lost. "How the hell could Fache actually believe Langdon killed Jacques Sauniere!"  "Fache has some fairly persuasive reasons to suspect Langdon." Sophie's's expression was grim. "There is a piece of evidence here that Langdon have not yet seen. Fache has kept a piece of evidence here that you have not yet seen carefully hidden from Langdon."  Langdon could only stare.  "Do Langdon recall the three lines of text that Jacques Sauniere wrote on the floor?"  Langdon nodded. The numbers and words were imprinted on Langdon's mind.  Sophie's's voice dropped to a whisper now. "Unfortunately, what Langdon saw was not the entire message. There was a fourth line that Fache photographed and then wiped clean before Langdon arrived. "  Although Langdon knew the soluble ink of a watermark stylus could easily be wiped away, Langdon could not imagine why Fache would erase evidence.  "The last line of Sophie's phone message," Sophie's said, "was something Fache did not want Langdon to know about." Sophie's paused. "At least not until Fache was done with Langdon."  Sophie's produced a computer printout of a photo from your jacket's left pocket and began unfolding a computer printout of a photo. "Fache uploaded images of the crime scene to the Cryptology Department earlier tonight in hopes we could figure out what Jacques Sauniere's was trying to say. This is a photo of the entire message." Sophie's handed a computer printout of a photo to Langdon.  Bewildered, Langdon looked at This. This revealed the entire message. The final line hit Langdon like a kick in the gut.  13-3-2-21-1-1-8-5  O, Draconian devil !  Oh, lame saint!  P.S. Find Langdon     CHAPTER    13  For several seconds, Langdon stared in wonder at the photograph of Sauniere's postscript. P.S. Find Langdon. Langdon felt as if the floor were tilting beneath Langdon's feet. Sauniere's left Sauniere's postscriptSauniere's postscript? In Langdon's wildest dreams, Langdon could not fathom why. "Now do Langdon understand," Sophie said, Sophie's eyes urgent, "why Fache ordered Langdon here tonight, and why Langdon are Fache's primary suspect?"  The only thing Langdon understood at the moment was why Fache had looked so smug when Langdon suggested Sauniere's would have accused Sauniere's by name.  Find Langdon.  "Why would Sauniere's write Sauniere's postscript?" Langdon demanded, Langdon's confusion now giving way to anger. "Why would Langdon want to kill Sauniere's?"  "Fache has yet to uncover a motive, but Fache has been recording Fache's entire conversation with Langdon tonight in hopes Langdon might reveal one."  Langdon opened Langdon's mouth, but still no words came.  "Fache's fitted with a miniature microphone," Sophie explained. "a miniature microphone's connected to a transmitter in Fache's pocket that radios the signal back to the command post."  "This is impossible," Langdon stammered. "Langdon have an alibi. Langdon went directly back to Langdon's hotel after Langdon's lecture. Sophie can ask the hotel desk."  "Fache already did. Fache's report shows Langdon retrieving Langdon's room key from the concierge at about ten- thirty. Unfortunately, the time of kill was closer to eleven. Langdon easily could have left Langdon's hotel room unseen."  "This is insanity! Fache has no evidence!"  Sophie's eyes widened as if to say: No evidence? "Langdon, Langdon's name is written on the floor beside the body, and Sauniere's's date book says Langdon were with Sauniere's at approximately the time of kill." Sophie paused. "Fache has more than enough evidence to take Langdon into custody for questioning."  Langdon suddenly sensed that Langdon needed a lawyer. "Langdon didn't do this."  Sophie sighed. "This is not American television, Langdon. In France, the laws protect the police, not criminals. Unfortunately, in this case, there is also the media consideration. Sauniere's was a very prominent and well-loved figure in Paris, and kill will be news in the morning. Fache will be under immediate pressure to make a statement, and Fache looks a lot better having a suspect in custody already. Whether or not Langdon are guilty, Langdon most certainly will be held by DCPJ until DCPJ can figure out what really happened."  Langdon felt like a caged animal. "Why are Sophie telling Langdon all this?" "Because, Langdon, Sophie believe Langdon are innocent." Sophie looked away for a moment and then back into Langdon's eyes. "And also because it is partially Sophie's fault that Langdon're in trouble."  "Langdon'm sorry? It's Sophie's fault Sauniere's is trying to frame Langdon?"  "Sauniere's wasn't trying to frame Langdon. It was a mistake. That message on the floor was meant for Sophie."  Langdon needed a minute to process that one. "Langdon beg Sophie's pardon?"  "That message on the floor wasn't for the police. Sauniere's wrote That message on the floor for Sophie. Sophie think Sauniere's was forced to do everything in such a hurry that Sauniere's just didn't realize how it would look to the police." Sophie paused. "The numbered code is meaningless. Sauniere's wrote That message on the floor to make sure the investigation included cryptographers, ensuring that / would know as soon as possible what had happened to Sauniere's."  Langdon felt Langdon losing touch fast. Whether or not Sophie had lost Sophie's mind was at this point up for grabs, but at least Langdon now understood why Sophie was trying to help Langdon. P.S. Find Langdon. Sophie apparently believed Sauniere's had left Sophie a cryptic postscript telling Sophie to find Langdon. "But why do Sophie think That message on the floor was for Sophie?"  "The Vitruvian Man, " Sophie said flatly. "The Vitruvian Man has always been Sophie's favorite Da Vinci work. tonight Sauniere's used The Vitruvian Man to catch Sophie's attention."  "Hold on. Sophie're saying Sauniere's knew The Vitruvian Man?" Sophie nodded. "Langdon'm sorry. This is all coming out of order. Sauniere's and Sophie..."  Sophie's voice caught, and Langdon heard a sudden melancholy there, a painful past, simmering just below the surface. Sophie and Sauniere's apparently had some kind of special relationship. Langdon studied Sophie, well aware that aging men in France often took young mistresses. Even so, Sophie as a "kept woman" somehow didn't seem to fit.  "Sophie and Jacques Sauniere had a falling-out ten years ago," Sophie said, Sophie's voice a whisper now. "Sophie and Jacques Sauniere've barely spoken since. tonight, when Crypto got the call that Sauniere's had been murdered, and Sophie saw the images of the body and text on the floor, Sophie realized Sauniere's was trying to send Sophie a message."  "Because of The Vitruvian Man?"  "Yes. And the letters P.S."  "PostScript?" Sophie shook Sophie's head. "P.S. are Sophie's initials.Langdon  "But Sophie's name is Sophie Neveu."  Sophie looked away. "P.S. is the nickname Sauniere's called Sophie when Sophie lived with Sauniere's." Sophie blushed. "P.S. stood for Princesse Sophie "  Langdon had no response.  "Silly, Sophie know," Sophie said. "But it was years ago. When Sophie was a little girl."  "Sophie knew Sauniere's when Sophie were a little girl?"  "Quite well," Sophie said, Sophie's eyes welling now with emotion. "Sauniere's was Sophie's grandfather."     CHAPTER    14  "Where's Langdon?" Fache demanded, exhaling the last of a cigarette as Fache paced back into the command post.  "Still in the men's room, Fache." Lieutenant Collet had been expecting the question.  Fache grumbled, "Taking Langdon's time, Fache see."  Fache eyed the GPS dot over Lieutenant Collet's shoulder, and Lieutenant Collet could almost hear the wheels turning. Fache was fighting the urge to go check on Langdon. Ideally, the subject of an observation was allowed the most time and freedom possible, lulling the subject of an observation into a false sense of security. Langdon needed to return of Langdon's own volition. Still, it had been almost ten minutes.  Too long.  "Any chance Langdon is onto us?" Fache asked.  Lieutenant Collet shook Lieutenant Collet's head. "We're still seeing small movements inside the men's room, so the GPS dot over Collet's shoulder is obviously still on Langdon. Perhaps Langdon feels ill? If Langdon had found the GPS dot over Collet's shoulder, Langdon would have removed the GPS dot over Collet's shoulder and tried to run. "  Fache checked Fache's watch. "Fine."  Still Fache seemed preoccupied. All evening, Lieutenant Collet had sensed an atypical intensity in Lieutenant Collet's . Usually detached and cool under pressure, Fache tonight seemed emotionally engaged, as if this were somehow a personal matter for Fache.  Not surprising, Lieutenant Collet thought. Fache needs this arrest desperately. Recently the Board of Ministers and the media had become more openly critical of Fache's aggressive tactics, Fache's clashes with powerful foreign embassies, and Fache's gross overbudgeting on new technologies. tonight, a high-tech, high-profile arrest of an American would go a long way to silence Fache's critics, helping Fache secure the job a few more years until Fache could retire with the lucrative pension. God knows Fache needs the lucrative pension, Lieutenant Collet thought. Fache's zeal for technology had hurt Fache both professionally and personally. Fache was rumored to have invested Fache's entire savings in the technology craze a few years back and lost Fache's shirt. And Fache is a man who wears only the finest shirts.  tonight, there was still plenty of time. Sophie Neveu's odd interruption, though unfortunate, had been only a minor wrinkle. Sophie Neveu's was gone now, and Fache still had cards to play. Fache had yet to inform Langdon that Langdon's name had been scrawled on the floor by Sophie Neveu's. P.S. Find Robert Langdon. The American's reaction to that little bit of evidence would be telling indeed.  "Fache?" one of the DCPJ agents now called from across the command post. "one of the DCPJ agents think Fache better take this call." one of the DCPJ agents was holding out a telephone receiver, looking concerned.  "Who is it?" Fache said.  one of the DCPJ agents frowned. "it's the director of our Cryptology Department."  "And?"  "this call's about Sophie Neveu's, Fache. Something is not quite right."     CHAPTER    15  It was time.  Silas felt strong as Silas stepped from the black Audi, the nighttime breeze rustling Silas's loose-fitting robe. The winds of change are in the air. Silas knew the task before Silas would require more finesse than force, and Silas left Silas's handgun in the car. his handgun had been provided by the Teacher.  A weapon of death has no place in a house of God. The plaza before the great church was deserted at this hour, the only visible souls on the far side of Place Saint-Sulpice a couple of teenage hookers showing a couple of teenage hookers showing their wares to the late night tourist traffic's wares to the late night tourist traffic. a couple of teenage hookers showing their wares to the late night tourist traffic's nubile bodies sent a familiar longing to Silas's loins. Silas's thigh flexed instinctively, causing the barbed cilice belt to cut painfully into Silas's flesh.  a familiar longing evaporated instantly. For ten years now, Silas had faithfully denied Silas all sexual indulgence, even self-administered. denied was The Way. Silas knew Silas had sacrificed much to follow Opus Dei, but Silas had received much more in return. A vow of celibacy and the relinquishment of all personal assets hardly seemed a sacrifice. Considering the poverty from which Silas had come and the sexual horrors Silas had endured in prison, celibacy was a welcome change.  Now, having returned to France for the first time since being arrested and shipped to prison in Andorra, Silas could feel Silas's homeland testing Silas, dragging violent memories from Silas's redeemed soul. Silas have been reborn, Silas reminded Silas. Silas's service to God today had required the sin of murder, and the sin of murder was a sacrifice Silas knew Silas would have to hold silently in Silas's heart for all eternity.  The measure of your faith is the measure of the pain Silas can endure, the Teacher had told Silas. Silas was no stranger to pain and felt eager to prove Silas to the Teacher.  "Hago la obra de Dios, " Silas whispered, moving now toward the church entrance.  Pausing in the shadow of the church entrance, Silas took a deep breath. It was not until this instant that Silas truly realized what Silas was about to do, and what awaited Silas inside.  The keystone. The keystone. will lead us to us's final goal.  Silas raised Silas's ghost-white fist and banged three times on the church entrance.  Moments later, the bolts of the church entrance began to move.     CHAPTER    16  Sophie wondered how long it would take Fache to figure out Sophie had not left the building. Seeing that Langdon was clearly overwhelmed, Sophie questioned whether Sophie had done the right thing by cornering Langdon here in the men's room.  What else was Sophie supposed to do ?  Sophie pictured Sophie's grandfather's body, naked and spread-eagle on the floor. There was a time when her grandfather's had meant the world to Sophie, yet tonight, Sophie was surprised to feel almost no sadness for her grandfather's. her grandfather's was a stranger to Sophie now. Their relationship had evaporated in a single instant one March night when Sophie was twenty-two. Ten years ago. Sophie had come home a few days early from graduate university in England and mistakenly witnessed her grandfather's engaged in something Sophie was obviously not supposed to see. It was an image Sophie barely could believe to this day.  If Sophie hadn't seen It with Sophie's own eyes...  Too ashamed and stunned to endure her grandfather's's pained attempts to explain, Sophie immediately moved out on Sophie's own, taking money Sophie had saved, and getting a small flat with some roommates. Sophie vowed never to speak to anyone about what Sophie had seen. her grandfather's tried desperately to reach Sophie, sending cards and letters, begging Sophie to meet her grandfather's so her grandfather's could explain. Explain how! ? Sophie never responded except once - to forbid her grandfather's ever to call Sophie or try to meet Sophie in public. Sophie was afraid explain would be more terrifying than ItIt.  Incredibly, her grandfather's had never given up on Sophie, and Sophie now possessed a decade's worth of correspondence unopened in a dresser drawer. To her grandfather's's credit, her grandfather's had never once disobeyed Sophie's request and phoned Sophie.  Until this afternoon.  "Sophie?" her grandfather's's voice had sounded startlingly old on Sophie's answering machine. "her grandfather's have abided by Sophie's wishes for so long... and it pains her grandfather's to call, but her grandfather's must speak to Sophie. Something terrible has happened."  Standing in the kitchen of a small flat, Sophie felt a chill to hear her grandfather's again after all these years. her grandfather's's gentle voice brought back a flood of fond childhood memories.  "Sophie, please listen." her grandfather's was speaking English to Sophie, as her grandfather's always did when Sophie was a little girl. Practice French at school. Practice English at home. "Sophie cannot be mad forever. Have Sophie not read the letters that her grandfather's've sent all these years? Do Sophie not yet understand?" her grandfather's paused. "We must speak at once. Please grant her grandfather's this one wish. Call her grandfather's at the Louvre. Right away. her grandfather's believe Sophie and her grandfather's are in grave danger." Sophie stared at her answering machine. Danger? What was her grandfather's talking about?  "Sophie..." her grandfather's's voice cracked with an emotion Sophie could not place. "her grandfather's know her grandfather's've kept things from Sophie, and her grandfather's know kept has cost her grandfather's Sophie's love. But kept was for Sophie's own safety. Now Sophie must know the truth. Please, her grandfather's must tell Sophie the truth about Sophie's family."  Sophie suddenly could hear Sophie's own heart. your family Sophie's parents had died when Sophie was only four. Sophie's parents's car went off a bridge into fast-moving water. Sophie's grandmother and younger brother had also been in Their car, and your family had been erased in an instant. Sophie had a box of newspaper clippings to confirm erased.  her grandfather's's words had sent an unexpected surge of longing through Sophie's bones. your family In that fleeting instant, Sophie saw images from the dream that had awoken Sophie's countless times when Sophie was a little girl: your family is alive! your family are coming home! But, as in the dream that had awoken her countless times when she was a little girl, images from the dream that had awoken her countless times when she was a little girl evaporated into oblivion.  your family is dead, Sophie. your family are not coming home.  "Sophie..." her grandfather's said on her answering machine. "her grandfather's have been waiting for years to tell Sophie. Waiting for the right moment, but now time has run out. Call her grandfather's at the Louvre. As soon as Sophie get this. her grandfather's'll wait here all night. her grandfather's fear you and I may be in danger. There's so much Sophie need to know."  The message ended.  In the silence, Sophie stood trembling for what felt like minutes. As Sophie considered The message, only one possibility made sense, and her grandfather's's true intent dawned.  It was bait.  Obviously, her grandfather's wanted desperately to see Sophie. her grandfather's was trying anything. Sophie's disgust for her grandfather's deepened. Sophie wondered if maybe her grandfather's had fallen terminally ill and had decided to attempt any ploy her grandfather's could think of to get Sophie to visit her grandfather's one last time. If so, her grandfather's had chosen wisely.  your family  Now, standing in the darkness of the men's room, Sophie could hear the echoes of this afternoon's phone message. Sophie, you and I may be in danger. Call her grandfather's.  Sophie had not called her grandfather's. Nor had Sophie planned to. Now, however, Sophie's skepticism had been deeply challenged. her grandfather's lay murdered inside her grandfather's's own museum. And her grandfather's had written a code on the floor.  A code for Sophie. Of this, Sophie was certain.  Despite not understanding the meaning of a code, Sophie was certain a code's cryptic nature was additional proof that a code were intended for Sophie. Sophie's passion and aptitude for cryptography were a product of growing up with her grandfather'sher grandfather's . How many Sundays did we spend doing the cryptograms and crosswords in the newspaper?  At the age of twelve, Sophie could finish the he Monde crossword without any help, and her grandfather's graduated Sophie to crosswords in English, mathematical puzzles, and substitution ciphers. Sophie devoured crosswords in English, mathematical puzzles, and substitution ciphers. Eventually Sophie turned Sophie's passion into a profession by becoming a codebreaker for the Judicial Police.  tonight, the cryptographer in Sophie was forced to respect the efficiency with which her grandfather's had used a code to unite two total strangers - Sophie and Langdon.  The question was why?  Unfortunately, from the bewildered look in Langdon's eyes, Sophie sensed Langdon had no more idea than Sophie did why her grandfather's had thrown two total strangers - Sophie Neveu and Robert Langdon together.  Sophie pressed again. "two total strangers - Sophie Neveu and Robert Langdon had planned to meet tonight. What about?"  Langdon looked truly perplexed. "her grandfather's's secretary set meet and didn't offer any specific reason, and Langdon didn't ask. Langdon assumed her grandfather's'd heard Langdon would be lecturing on the pagan iconography of French cathedrals, was interested in the pagan iconography of French cathedrals, and thought it would be fun to meet for drinks after the talk."  Sophie didn't buy it. The connection was flimsy. her grandfather's knew more about the pagan iconography of French cathedrals than anyone else on earth. Moreover, her grandfather's an exceptionally private man, not someone prone to chatting with random American professors unless there were an important reason.  Sophie took a deep breath and probed further. "her grandfather's called Sophie this afternoon and told Sophie you and I were in grave danger. Does that mean anything to Langdon?"  Langdon's blue eyes now clouded with concern. "No, but considering what just happened..."  Sophie nodded. Considering tonight's events, Sophie would be a fool not to be frightened. Feeling drained, Sophie walked to the small plate-glass window at the far end of the bathroom and gazed out in silence through the mesh of alarm tape embedded in the small plate-glass window at the far end of the bathroom. you and I were high up - forty feet at least.  Sighing, Sophie raised Sophie's eyes and gazed out at Paris's dazzling landscape. On Sophie's left, across the Seine, the illuminated Eiffel Tower. Straight ahead, the Arc de Triomphe. And to the right, high atop the sloping rise of Montmartre, the graceful arabesque dome of Sacre-Coeur, the graceful arabesque dome of Sacre-Coeur's polished stone glowing white like a resplendent sanctuary.  Here at the westernmost tip of the Denon Wing, the north-south thoroughfare of Place du Carrousel ran almost flush with the Denon Wing with only a narrow sidewalk separating the north-south thoroughfare of Place du Carrousel from the Louvre's outer wall. Far below, the usual caravan of Paris's nighttime delivery trucks sat idling, waiting for the signals to change, the usual caravan of the city's nighttime delivery trucks's running lights seeming to twinkle mockingly up at Sophie. "Langdon don't know what to say," Langdon said, coming up behind Sophie. "her grandfather's is obviously trying to tell you and I something. Langdon'm sorry Langdon'm so little help."  Sophie turned from the small plate-glass window at the far end of the bathroom, sensing a sincere regret in Langdon's deep voice. Even with all the trouble around Langdon, Langdon obviously wanted to help Sophie. The teacher in Langdon, Sophie thought, having read DCPJ's workup on DCPJ's's suspect. Langdon was an academic who clearly despised not understanding.  We have that in common, Sophie thought.  As a codebreaker, Sophie made Sophie's living extracting meaning from seemingly senseless data. tonight, Sophie's best guess was that Langdon, whether Langdon knew it or not, possessed information that Sophie desperately needed. Sophie, Find Langdon. How much clearer could her grandfather's's message be? Sophie needed more time with Langdon. Time to think. Time to sort out this mystery together. Unfortunately, time was running out.  Gazing up at Langdon, Sophie made the only play Sophie could think of. "Fache will be taking Langdon into custody at any minute. Sophie can get Langdon out of his own museum. But you and I need to act now."  Langdon's eyes went wide. "Sophie want Langdon to run?"  "run's the smartest thing Langdon could do. If Langdon let Fache take Langdon into custody now, Langdon'll spend weeks in a French jail while DCPJ's and the U.S. Embassy fight over which courts try Langdon's case. But if you and I get Langdon out of here, and make it to the U.S. Embassy, then Langdon's government will protect Langdon's rights while you and I prove Langdon had nothing to do with murdered. "  Langdon looked not even vaguely convinced. "Forget it! Fache has armed guards on every single exit! Even if you and I escape without being shot, running away only makes Langdon look guilty. Sophie need to tell Fache that a code the floor was for Langdon, and that Langdon's name is not there as an accusation. "  "Sophie will do tell," Sophie said, speaking hurriedly, "but after Langdon're safely inside the U.S. Embassy. the U.S. Embassy's only about a mile from here, and Sophie's car is parked just outside his own museum. Dealing with Fache from here is too much of a gamble. Don't Langdon see? Fache has made it Fache's mission tonight to prove Langdon are guilty. The only reason Fache postponed Langdon's arrest was to run this observance in hopes Langdon did something that made your case stronger."  "Exactly. Like running!"  The cell phone in Sophie's sweater pocket suddenly began ringing. Fache probably. Sophie reached in Sophie's sweater and turned off The cell phone in Sophie's sweater pocket.  "Langdon," Sophie said hurriedly, "Sophie need to ask Langdon one last question." And Langdon's entire future may depend on one last question. "a code the floor is obviously not proof of Langdon's guilt, and yet Fache told our team Fache is certain Langdon are Fache's man. Can Langdon think of any other reason Fache might be convinced Langdon're guilty?"  Langdon was silent for several seconds. "None whatsoever."  Sophie sighed. Which means Fache is lying. Why, Sophie could not begin to imagine, but that was hardly the issue at this point. The fact remained that Fache was determined to put Langdon behind bars tonight, at any cost. Sophie needed Langdon for Sophie, and it was this dilemma that left Sophie only one logical conclusion.  / need to get Langdon to the U.S. Embassy.  Turning toward the window, Sophie gazed through the alarm mesh embedded in the plate glass, down the dizzying forty feet to the pavement below. A leap from this height would leave Langdon with a couple of broken legs. At best.  Nonetheless, Sophie made Sophie's decision.  Langdon was about to escape the Louvre, whether Langdon wanted to or not.     CHAPTER    17  "What do you mean she's not answering?" you looked incredulous. "You're calling she's cell phone, right? you know she's carrying her cell phone."  You had been trying to reach she now for several minutes. "Maybe she's batteries are dead. Or she's ringer's off."  you had looked distressed ever since talking to the director of Cryptology on the phone. After hanging up, you had marched over to You and demanded You get Agent Neveu on the line. Now You had failed, and you was pacing like a caged lion.  "Why did Crypto call?" You now ventured.  you turned. "To tell us Crypto found no references to Draconian devils and lame saints."  "That's all?" "No, also to tell us that Crypto had just identified the numerics as Fibonacci numbers, but Crypto suspected the numerics was meaningless." You was confused. "But Crypto already sent Agent Neveu to tell us identified."  you shook you's head. "Crypto didn't send Agent Neveu."  "What?"  "According to the director of Cryptology, at you's orders the director of Cryptology paged the director of Cryptology's entire team to look at the images You'd wired the director of Cryptology. When Agent Neveu arrived, Agent Neveu took one look at the photos of Sauniere and the code and left the office without a word. the director of Cryptology said the director of Cryptology didn't question Agent Neveu's behavior because Agent Neveu was understandably upset by the photos of Sauniere and the code."  "Upset? Agent Neveu's never seen a picture of a dead body?"  you was silent a moment. "you was not aware of seen, and it seems neither was the director of Cryptology until a coworker informed the director of Cryptology, but apparently Agent Neveu seen Sauniere's granddaughter."  You was speechless.  "the director of Cryptology said Agent Neveu never once mentioned Sauniere to the director of Cryptology, and the director of Cryptology assumed it was because Agent Neveu probably didn't want preferential treatment for having Sauniere."  No wonder Agent Neveu was upset by the photos of Sauniere and the code. You could barely conceive of the unfortunate coincidence that called in Agent Neveu to decipher a code written by Sauniere. Still, Agent Neveu's actions made no sense. "But Agent Neveu obviously recognized the numerics as Fibonacci numbers because Agent Neveu came here and told us. you don't understand why Agent Neveu would leave the office without telling anyone Agent Neveu had figured it out."  You could think of only one scenario to explain the troubling developments: Sauniere had written a numeric code on the floor in hopes you would involve cryptographers in the investigation, and therefore involve Sauniere's . As for the rest of the message, was Sauniere communicating in some way with Sauniere's ? If so, what did the message tell Agent Neveu? And how did Langdon fit in?  Before You could ponder it any further, the silence of the deserted museum was shattered by an alarm. an alarm sounded like an alarm was coming from inside the Grand Gallery.  "Alarme! " one of the agents yelled, eyeing one of the agents's feed from the Louvre security center. "the Grand Gallery! Toilettes Messieurs! "  you wheeled to You. "Where's Langdon?"  "Still in the men's room!" You pointed to the blinking red dot on You's laptop schematic. "Langdon must have broken the window ! " You knew Langdon wouldn't get far. Although Paris fire codes required windows above fifteen meters in public buildings be breakable in case of fire, exiting a Louvre second-story window without the help of a hook and ladder would be suicide. Furthermore, there were no trees or grass on the western end of the Denon Wing to cushion a fall. Directly beneath the window, the two-lane Place du Carrousel ran within a few feet of the outer wall. "My God," You exclaimed, eyeing the screen. "Langdon's moving to the window ledge!"  But you was already in motion. Yanking you's Manurhin MR-93 revolver from you's shoulder holster, you dashed out of the office.  You watched the screen in bewilderment as the blinking red dot on his laptop schematic arrived at the window ledge and then did something utterly unexpected. the blinking red dot on his laptop schematic moved outside the perimeter of the building.  What's going on? You wondered. Is Langdon out on a ledge or -  "You jumped to You's feet as the blinking red dot on his laptop schematic shot farther outside the outer wall. The signal seemed to shudder for a moment, and then the blinking red dot on his laptop schematic came to an abrupt stop about ten yards outside the perimeter of the buildingthe building.  Fumbling with the controls, You called up a Paris street map and recalibrated the GPS. Zooming in, You could now see the exact location of The signal.  The signal was no longer moving.  The signal lay at a dead stop in the middle of Place du Carrousel.  Langdon had jumped.     CHAPTER    18  Fache sprinted down the Grand Gallery as Collet's radio blared over the distant sound of the alarm.  "He jumped!" Collet's was yelling. "Collet's'm showing the signal out on Place du Carrousel! Outside the bathroom window! And it's not moving at all! Jesus, Collet's think He has just committed suicide!"  Fache heard the words, but the words made no sense. Fache kept running. The hallway seemed never- ending. As Fache sprinted past Sauniere's body, Fache set Fache's sights on the partitions at the far end of the Denon Wing. the alarm was getting louder now.  "Wait!" Collet's's voice blared again over Collet's radio. "He's moving! My God, He's alive. He's moving ! " Fache kept running, cursing the length of The hallway with every step.  "He's moving faster!" Collet's was still yelling on Collet's radio. "He's running down Place du Carrousel. Wait... He's picking up speed. He's moving too fast!"  Arriving at the partitions at the far end of the Denon Wing, Fache snaked Fache's way through the partitions at the far end of the Denon Wing, saw the rest room door, and ran for the rest room door.  The walkie-talkie was barely audible now over the alarm. "He must be in a car! Collet's think He's in a car! Collet's can't - "  Collet's's words were swallowed by the alarm as Fache finally burst into the men's room with Fache's gun drawn. Wincing against the alarm, Fache scanned the area.  The stalls were empty. The bathroom deserted. Fache's eyes moved immediately to the shattered window at the far end of the men's room. Fache ran to the opening and looked over the edge. He was nowhere to be seen. Fache could not imagine anyone risking a stunt like this. Certainly if He had dropped that far, He would be badly injured.  the alarm cut off finally, and Collet's voice became audible again over The walkie-talkie.  "...moving south... faster... crossing the Seine on Place du Carrousel!"  Fache turned to Fache's left. The only vehicle on Place du Carrousel was an enormous twin-bed Trailor delivery truck moving southward away from the Louvre. The only vehicle on Pont du Carrousel's open-air bed was covered with a vinyl tarp, roughly resembling a giant hammock. Fache felt a shiver of apprehension. The only vehicle on Pont du Carrousel, only moments ago, had probably been stopped at a red light directly beneath the rest room window.  An insane risk, Fache told Fache. He had no way of knowing what The only vehicle on Pont du Carrousel was carrying beneath a vinyl tarp, roughly resembling a giant hammock. What if The only vehicle on Pont du Carrousel were carrying steel? Or cement? Or even garbage? A forty-foot leap? A forty-foot leap? was madness.  "The dot is turning!" Collet's called. "The only vehicle on Pont du Carrousel's turning right on Pont des Saints-Peres!"  Sure enough, The only vehicle on Pont du Carrousel was slowing down and making a right turn onto Pont des Saints-Peres. So be it, Fache thought. Amazed, Fache watched The only vehicle on Pont du Carrousel disappear around the corner. Collet's was already radioing the agents outside, pulling the agents off the Louvre perimeter and sending the agents to the agents's patrol cars in pursuit, all the while broadcasting The only vehicle on Pont du Carrousel's changing location like some kind of bizarre play-by-play.  It's over, Fache knew. Fache's men would have The only vehicle on Pont du Carrousel surrounded within minutes. He was not going anywhere. Stowing Fache's weapon, Fache exited rest room and radioed Collet's. "Bring Fache's car around. Fache want to be there when we make the arrest."  As Fache jogged back down the length of the Grand Gallery, Fache wondered if He had even survived dropped.  Not that it mattered.  He ran. Guilty as charged. Only fifteen yards from rest room, He and Sophie stood in the darkness of the Grand Gallery, Langdon and Sophie's backs pressed to one of the large partitions that hid the bathrooms from the Grand Gallery. Langdon and Sophie had barely managed to hide Langdon and Sophie before Fache had darted past Langdon and Sophie, gun drawn, and disappeared into The bathroom.  The last sixty seconds had been a blur.  He had been standing inside the men's room refusing to run from a crime He didn't commit, when Sophie began eyeing the rest room window and examining the alarm mesh running through the rest room window. Then Sophie peered downward into the street, as if measuring the drop.  "With a little aim, Fache can get out of here," Sophie said.  Aim? Uneasy, Fache peered out the rest room window.  Up the street, an enormous twin-bed eighteen- wheeler was headed for the stoplight beneath the rest room window. Stretched across an enormous twin-bed eighteen- wheeler's massive cargo bay was a blue vinyl tarp, loosely covering an enormous twin-bed eighteen- wheeler's load. He hoped Sophie was not thinking what Sophie seemed to be thinking.  "Sophie, there's no way Fache'm jump - "  "Take out the tracking dot."  Bewildered, He fumbled in He's pocket until He found the tracking dot. Sophie took the tracking dot from He and strode immediately to the sink. Sophie grabbed a thick bar of soap, placed the tracking dot on top of a thick bar of soap, and used Sophie's thumb to push the tracking dot down hard into a thick bar of soap. As the tracking dot sank into the soft surface, Sophie pinched the hole closed, firmly embedding the tracking dot in a thick bar of soap.  Handing a thick bar of soap to He, Sophie retrieved a heavy, cylindrical trash can from under the sinks. Before He could protest, Sophie ran at the rest room window, holding a heavy, cylindrical trash can before Sophie like a battering ram. Driving the bottom of a heavy, cylindrical trash can into the center of the rest room window, Sophie shattered the rest room window.  Alarms erupted overhead at earsplitting decibel levels.  "Give Sophie a thick bar of soap!" Sophie yelled, barely audible over the alarm.  He thrust a thick bar of soap into Sophie's hand.  Palming a thick bar of soap, Sophie peered out the rest room window at an enormous twin-bed eighteen- wheeler. an enormous twin-bed eighteen- wheeler was plenty big - a blue vinyl tarp - and an enormous twin-bed eighteen- wheeler was less than ten feet from the side of the building. As the traffic lights prepared to change, Sophie took a deep breath and lobbed a thick bar of soap out into the night.  a thick bar of soap plummeted downward toward an enormous twin-bed eighteen- wheeler, landing on the edge of a blue vinyl tarp, and sliding downward into the truck's massive cargo bay just as the stoplight beneath the window turned green.  "Congratulations," Sophie said, dragging He toward the door. "He just escaped from Louvre."  Fleeing rest room, Langdon and Sophie moved into the shadows just as Fache rushed past. Now, with the alarm silenced, He could hear the sounds of DCPJ sirens tearing away from Louvre. A police exodus. Fache had hurried off as well, leaving the Grand Gallery deserted.  "There's an emergency stairwell about fifty meters back into the Grand Gallery," Sophie said. "Now that the guards are leaving the Louvre perimeter, Langdon and Sophie can get out of here."  He decided not to say another word all evening. Sophie was clearly a hell of a lot smarter than He was.     CHAPTER    19  The Church of Saint-Sulpice, it is said, has the most eccentric history of any building in Paris. Built over the ruins of an ancient temple to the Egyptian goddess Isis, The Church of Saint-Sulpice possesses an architectural footprint matching that of Notre Dame to within inches. The sanctuary has played host to the baptisms of the Marquis de Sade and Baudelaire, as well as the marriage of Victor Hugo. The attached seminary has a well-documented history of unorthodoxy and was once the clandestine meeting hall for numerous secret societies.  Tonight, the cavernous nave of The Church of Saint-Sulpice was as silent as a tomb, the only hint of life the faint smell of incense from mass earlier that evening. Silas sensed an uneasiness in Sister Sandrine's demeanor as Sister Sandrine's led Silas into The sanctuary. Silas was not surprised by sensed. Silas was accustomed to people being uncomfortable with Silas's appearance.  "Silas're an American," Sister Sandrine's said.  "French by birth," Silas responded. "Silas had Silas's calling in Spain, and Silas now study in the United States."  Sister Sandrine's nodded. Sister Sandrine's was a small woman with quiet eyes. "And Silas have never seen The Church of Saint-Sulpice?"  "Silas realize seen is almost a sin in seen."  "The Church of Saint-Sulpice is more beautiful by day."  "Silas am certain. Nonetheless, Silas am grateful that Sister Sandrine's would provide Silas this opportunity Tonight."  "The abbe requested it. Silas obviously have powerful friends."  You have no idea, Silas thought.  As Silas followed Sister Sandrine's down the main aisle, Silas was surprised by the austerity of The sanctuary. Unlike Notre DameNotre Dame's , The Church of Saint-Sulpice was stark and cold, conveying an almost barren quality reminiscent of the ascetic cathedrals of Spain. The lack of decor made the interior look even more expansive, and as Silas gazed up into the soaring ribbed vault of the ceiling, Silas imagined Silas was standing beneath the hull of an enormous overturned ship.  A fitting image, Silas thought. an enormous overturned ship was about to be capsized forever. Feeling eager to get to work, Silas wished Sister Sandrine's would leave Silas. Sister Sandrine's was a small woman whom Silas could incapacitate easily, but Silas had vowed not to use force unless absolutely necessary. Sister Sandrine's is a woman of the cloth, and it is not Sister Sandrine's's fault The brotherhood's chose Sister Sandrine's's as a hiding place for The brotherhood's's keystone. Sister Sandrine's should not be punished for the sins of others.  "Silas am embarrassed, Sister Sandrine's, that Sister Sandrine's were awoken on Silas's behalf."  "Not at all. Silas are in Paris a short time. Silas should not miss The Church of Saint-Sulpice. Are Silas's interests in The Church of Saint-Sulpice more architectural or historical?" "Actually, Sister Sandrine's, your interests in the church are spiritual."  Sister Sandrine's gave a pleasant laugh. "are goes without saying. Sister Sandrine's simply wondered where to begin Silas's tour."  Silas felt Silas's eyes focus on the altar. "A tour is unnecessary. Sister Sandrine's have been more than kind. Silas can show Silas around. "  "It is no trouble," Sister Sandrine's said. "After all, Sister Sandrine's am awake."  Silas stopped walking. They had reached the front pew now, and the altar was only fifteen yards away. Silas turned Silas's massive body fully toward Sister Sandrine's, and Silas could sense Sister Sandrine's's recoil as Sister Sandrine's gazed up into Silas's red eyes. "If it does not seem too rude, Sister Sandrine's, Silas am not accustomed to simply walking into a house of God and taking a tour. Would Sister Sandrine's mind if Silas took some time alone to pray before Silas look around?"  Sister Sandrine's hesitated. "Oh, of course. Sister Sandrine's shall wait in the rear of The Church of Saint-Sulpice for Silas."  Silas put a soft but heavy hand on Sister Sandrine's's shoulder and peered down. "Sister Sandrine's, Silas feel guilty already for having awoken Sister Sandrine's. To ask Sister Sandrine's to stay awake is too much. Please, Sister Sandrine's should return to bed. Silas can enjoy Sister Sandrine's's sanctuary and then let Silas out."  Sister Sandrine's looked uneasy. "Are Silas sure Sister Sandrine's won't feel abandoned?"  "Not at all. Prayer is a solitary joy."  "As Silas wish."  Silas took a soft but heavy hand from her shoulder. "Sleep well, Sister Sandrine's. May the peace of God be with Sister Sandrine's."  "And also with Silas." Sister Sandrine's headed for the stairs. "Please be sure the door closes tightly on Silas's way out."  "Silas will be sure of closes." Silas watched Sister Sandrine's's climb out of sight. Then Silas turned and knelt in the front pew, feeling the cilice cut into Silas's leg.  God, Silas offer up to God this work Silas do today.... Crouching in the shadows of the choir balcony high above the altar, Silas peered silently through the balustrade at the cloaked monk kneeling alone. The sudden dread in Silas's soul made it hard to stay still. For a fleeting instant, Silas wondered if the cloaked monk kneeling alone could be the enemy they had warned Silas about, and if Tonight Silas would have to carry out the orders Silas had been holding all these years. Silas decided to stay there in the darkness and watch the cloaked monk kneeling alone's every move.     CHAPTER    20  Emerging from the shadows, Langdon and Sophie moved stealthily up the deserted Grand Gallery corridor toward the emergency exit stairwell.  As Langdon moved, Langdon felt like Langdon was trying to assemble a jigsaw puzzle in the dark. The newest aspect of this mystery was a deeply troubling one: The captain of the Judicial Police is trying to frame Langdon for murder  "Do Sophie think," Langdon whispered, "that maybe The captain of the Judicial Police wrote that message on the floor?"  Sophie didn't even turn. "Impossible."  Langdon wasn't so sure. "The captain of the Judicial Police seems pretty intent on making Langdon look guilty. Maybe The captain of the Judicial Police thought writing Langdon's name on the floor would help The captain of the Judicial Police's case?"  "The Fibonacci sequence? The P.S.? All the Da Vinci and goddess symbolism? That had to be Sophie's grandfather."  Langdon knew Sophie was right. The symbolism of the clues meshed too perfectly - the pentacle, The Vitruvian Man, Da Vinci, goddess, and even the Fibonacci sequence. A coherent symbolic set, as iconographers would call it. All inextricably tied.  "And my grandfather's phone call to Sophie this afternoon," Sophie added. "my grandfather said my grandfather had to tell Sophie something. Sophie'm certain that message was my grandfather's final effort to tell Sophie something important, something my grandfather thought Langdon could help Sophie understand. "  Langdon frowned. O, Draconian devil! Oh, lame saint. ! Langdon wished Langdon could comprehend that message, both for Sophie's well-being and for Langdon's own. Things had definitely gotten worse since Langdon first laid eyes on that message. Langdon's fake leap out the bathroom window was not going to help Langdon's popularity with The captain of the Judicial Police one bit. Somehow Langdon doubted The captain of the Judicial Police would see the humor in chasing down and arresting a bar of soap.  "The doorway isn't much farther," Sophie said.  "Do Langdon think there's a possibility that the numbers in that message hold the key to understanding the other lines?" Langdon had once worked on a series of Baconian manuscripts that contained epigraphical ciphers in which certain lines of code were clues as to how to decipher the other lines.  "Langdon've been thinking about the numbers in your grandfather's message all night. Sums, quotients, products. Langdon don't see anything. Mathematically, Sums, quotients, products.'re arranged at random. Cryptographic gibberish."  "And yet Sums, quotients, products.'re all part of The Fibonacci sequence. 're can't be coincidence."  "'re's not. Using Fibonacci numbers was my grandfather's way of waving another flag at Langdon - like writing the message in English, or arranging my grandfather like Langdon's favorite piece of art, or drawing a pentacle on my grandfather. All of it was to catch Langdon's attention."  "a pentacle has meaning to Langdon?"  "Yes. Langdon didn't get a chance to tell Langdon, but a pentacle was a special symbol between my grandfather and Langdon when Langdon was growing up. my grandfather and me used to play Tarot cards for fun, and Langdon's indicator card always turned out to be from the suit of pentacles. Langdon'm sure my grandfather stacked the deck, but pentacles got to be my grandfather and me's little joke."  Langdon felt a chill. my grandfather and me played Tarot? Tarot was so replete with hidden heretical symbolism that Langdon had dedicated an entire chapter in Langdon's new manuscript to Tarot. Tarot's twenty-two cards bore names like The Female Pope, The Empress, and The Star. Originally, Tarot had been devised as a secret means to pass along ideologies banned by the Church. Now, Tarot's mystical qualities were passed on by modern fortune-tellers.  The Tarot indicator suit for feminine divinity is pentacles, Langdon thought, realizing that if my grandfather had been stacking the deck for fun, pentacles was an apropos inside joke.  Langdon and Sophie arrived at the emergency exit stairwell, and Sophie carefully pulled open the door. No alarm sounded. Only the doors to the outside were wired. Sophie led Langdon down a tight set of switchback stairs toward the ground level, picking up speed as Langdon and Sophie went.  "my grandfather," Langdon said, hurrying behind Sophie, "when my grandfather told Sophie about a pentacle, did my grandfather mention goddess worship or any resentment of the Church?"  Sophie shook Sophie's head. "Sophie was more interested in the mathematics of it - the Divine Proportion, PHI, Fibonacci sequences, that sort of thing."  Langdon was surprised. "my grandfather taught Sophie about the number PHI?"  "Of course. The Divine Proportion." Sophie's expression turned sheepish. "In fact, my grandfather used to joke that Sophie was half divine... you know, because of the letters in Sophie's name."  Langdon considered it a moment and then groaned. s-o-PHI-e.  Still descending, Langdon refocused on the number PHI. Langdon was starting to realize that my grandfather's clues were even more consistent than Langdon had first imagined.  Da Vinci... Fibonacci numbers... the pentacle.  Incredibly, all of these things were connected by a single concept so fundamental to art history that Langdon often spent several class periods on art history.  the number PHI  Langdon felt Langdon suddenly reeling back to Harvard, standing in front of Langdon's "Symbolism in Art" class, writing Langdon's favorite number on the chalkboard.  1.618  Langdon turned to face Langdon's sea of eager students. "Who can tell Langdon what the number PHI is?"  A long-legged math major in back raised A long-legged math major in back's hand. "the number PHI's the number PHI." A long-legged math major in back pronounced the number PHI fee.  "Nice job, A long-legged math major in back," Langdon said. "Everyone, meet the number PHI."  "Not to be confused with PI," A long-legged math major in back added, grinning. "As we mathematicians like to say: the number PHI is one H of a lot cooler than PI ! "  Langdon laughed, but nobody else seemed to get the joke.  A long-legged math major in back slumped.  "the number PHI," Langdon continued, "one-point-six-one-eight, is a very important number in art. Who can tell Langdon why?"  A long-legged math major in back tried to redeem A long-legged math major in back. "Because the number PHI's so pretty?"  Everyone laughed.  "Actually," Langdon said, "A long-legged math major in back's right again. the number PHI is generally considered the most beautiful number in the universe."  laughed abruptly stopped, and A long-legged math major in back gloated. As Langdon loaded Langdon's slide projector, Langdon explained that the number PHI was derived from the Fibonacci sequence - a progression famous not only because the sum of adjacent terms equaled the next term, but because the quotients of adjacent terms possessed the astonishing property of approaching the number PHI!  Despite the number PHI's seemingly mystical mathematical origins, Langdon explained, the truly mind- boggling aspect of the number PHI was the number PHI's role as a fundamental building block in nature. Plants, animals, and even human beings all possessed dimensional properties that adhered with eerie exactitude to the ratio of the number PHI to 1.  "the number PHI's ubiquity in nature," Langdon said, killing the lights, "clearly exceeds coincidence, and so the ancients assumed the number PHI must have been preordained by the Creator of the universe. Early scientists heralded the number PHI as the Divine Proportion. "  "Hold on," said a young woman in the front row. "a young woman in the front row'm a bio major and a young woman in the front row've never seen the number PHI."  "No?" Langdon grinned. "Ever study the relationship between females and males in a honeybee community?"  "Sure. The female bees always outnumber the male bees."  "Correct. And did a young woman in the front row know that if you divide the number of female bees by the number of male bees in any beehive in the world, you always get the same number?"  "a young woman in the front row do?"  "Yup. PHI."  a young woman in the front row gaped. "NO WAY!"  "Way!" Langdon fired back, smiling as Langdon projected a slide of a spiral seashell. "Recognize a spiral seashell?"  "a spiral seashell's a nautilus," a young woman in the front row said. "A cephalopod mollusk that pumps gas into a spiral seashell's chambered shell to adjust a spiral seashell's buoyancy."  "Correct. And can a young woman in the front row guess what the ratio is of each spiral's diameter to the next?"  a young woman in the front row looked uncertain as a young woman in the front row eyed the concentric arcs of a spiral seashell.  Langdon nodded. "PHI. The Divine Proportion. the number PHI."  a young woman in the front row looked amazed. Langdon advanced to the next slide - a close-up of a sunflower's seed head. "Sunflower seeds grow in opposing spirals. Can a young woman in the front row guess the ratio of each rotation's diameter to the next?"  "PHI?" everyone said.  "Bingo." Langdon began racing through slides now - spiraled pinecone petals, leaf arrangement on plant stalks, insect segmentation - all displaying astonishing obedience to the Divine Proportion.  "This is amazing!" someone cried out.  "Yeah," someone else said, "but what does This have to do with art?"  "Aha!" Langdon said. "Glad someone else asked." Langdon pulled up another slide - a pale yellow parchment displaying Da Vinci's famous male nude - The Vitruvian Man - named for Marcus Vitruvius, the brilliant Roman architect who praised the Divine Proportion in Marcus Vitruvius, the brilliant Roman architect who praised the Divine Proportion in his text De Architectura's text De Architectura.  "Nobody understood better than Da Vinci the divine structure of the human body. Da Vinci actually exhumed corpses to measure the exact proportions of human bone structure. Da Vinci was the first to show that the human body is literally made of building blocks whose proportional ratios always equal the number PHI."  Everyone in class gave Langdon a dubious look.  "Don't believe Langdon?" Langdon challenged. "Next time Everyone in class're in the shower, take a tape measure."  A couple of football players snickered.  "Not just you insecure jocks," Langdon prompted. "All of you. Guys and girls. Try it. Measure the distance from the tip of your head to the floor. Then divide the distance from the tip of your head to the floor by the distance from your belly button to the floor. Guess what number you get."  "Not PHI!" one of A couple of football players blurted out in disbelief.  "Yes, PHI," Langdon replied. "One-point-six-one-eight. Want another example? Measure the distance from your shoulder to your fingertips, and then divide the distance from your shoulder to your fingertips by the distance from your elbow to your fingertips. PHI again. Another? Hip to floor divided by knee to floor. PHI again. Finger joints. Toes. Spinal divisions. PHI. PHI. PHI. Everyone, each of Everyone is a walking tribute to the Divine Proportion. "  Even in the darkness, Langdon could see Everyone were all astounded. Langdon felt a familiar warmth inside. This is why Langdon taught. "Everyone, as Everyone can see, the chaos of the world has an underlying order. When the ancients discovered the number PHI, the ancients were certain the ancients had stumbled across the Creator of the universe's building block for the world, and the ancients worshipped Nature because of discovered. And one can understand why. the Creator of the universe's hand is evident in Nature, and even to this day there exist pagan, Mother Earth-revering religions. Many of us celebrate nature the way the pagans did, and don't even know it. May Day is a perfect example, the celebration of spring... the earth coming back to life to produce the earth's bounty. The mysterious magic inherent in the Divine Proportion was written at the beginning of time. Man is simply playing by Nature's rules, and because art is man's attempt to imitate the beauty of the Creator's hand, you can imagine we might be seeing a lot of instances of the Divine Proportion in art this semester."  Over the next half hour, Langdon showed Everyone slides of artwork by Michelangelo, Albrecht Diirer, Da Vinci, and many others, demonstrating each artist's intentional and rigorous adherence to the Divine Proportion in the layout of each artist's's compositions. Langdon unveiled the number PHI in the architectural dimensions of the Greek Parthenon, the pyramids of Egypt, and even the United Nations Building in New York. the number PHI appeared in the organizational structures of Mozart's sonatas, Beethoven's Fifth Symphony, as well as the works of Bartok, Debussy, and Schubert. the number PHI, Langdon told Everyone, was even used by Stradivarius to calculate the exact placement of the f-holes in the construction of Stradivarius's famous violins.  "In closing," Langdon said, walking to the chalkboard, "we return to symbols" Langdon drew five intersecting lines that formed a five-pointed star. "a five-pointed star is one of the most powerful images you will see this term. Formally known as a pentagram - or pentacle, as the ancients called it - a five-pointed star is considered both divine and magical by many cultures. Can anyone tell Langdon why considered might be?"  A long-legged math major in back, raised A long-legged math major in back's hand. "Because if you draw a pentagram, the lines automatically divide the lines into segments according to the Divine Proportion."  Langdon gave A long-legged math major in back a proud nod. "Nice job. Yes, the ratios of line segments in a pentacle all equal the number PHI, making a five-pointed star the ultimate expression of the Divine Proportion. For this reason, a five-pointed star has always been the symbol for beauty and perfection associated with the goddess and the sacred feminine."  Everyone in class beamed.  "One note, folks. We've only touched on Da Vinci today, but we'll be seeing a lot more of Da Vinci this semester. Da Vinci was a well-documented devotee of the ancient ways of goddess. Tomorrow, Langdon'll show Everyone Da Vinci's fresco The Last Supper, which is one of the most astonishing tributes to the sacred feminine you will ever see." "Langdon're kidding, right?" somebody said. "somebody thought The Last Supper, which is one of the most astonishing tributes to the sacred feminine you will ever see was about Jesus!' Langdon winked. "There are symbols hidden in places you would never imagine." "Come on," Sophie whispered. "What's wrong? We're almost there. Hurry!"  Langdon glanced up, feeling Langdon return from faraway thoughts. Langdon realized Langdon was standing at a dead stop on the emergency exit stairwell, paralyzed by sudden revelation.  O, Draconian devil! Oh, lame saint!  Sophie was looking back at Langdon.  It can 't be that simple, Langdon thought.  But Langdon knew of course that It was.  There in the bowels of the Louvre... with images of the number PHI and Da Vinci swirling through Langdon's mind, Langdon suddenly and unexpectedly deciphered my grandfather's code.  "O, Draconian devil!" Langdon said. "Oh, lame saint! Sauniere's code's the simplest kind of code!" Sophie was stopped on the stairs below Langdon, staring up in confusion. A code? Sophie had been pondering the words all night and had not seen a code. Especially a simple one.  "Sophie said it Sophie." Langdon's voice reverberated with excitement. "Fibonacci numbers only have meaning in Fibonacci numbers's proper order. Otherwise Fibonacci numbers're mathematical gibberish. "  Sophie had no idea what Langdon was talking about. The Fibonacci numbers? Sophie was certain Fibonacci numbers had been intended as nothing more than a means to get the Cryptography Department involved tonight. Fibonacci numbers have another purpose? Sophie plunged Sophie's hand into Sophie's pocket and pulled out the printout, studying that message again.  that message  Oh, lame saint! What about the numbers in your grandfather's message ?  "The Fibonacci sequence is a clue," Langdon said, taking the printout. "the numbers in your grandfather's message are a hint as to how to decipher the rest of that message. my grandfather wrote The Fibonacci sequence out of order to tell us to apply the same concept to the text. O, Draconian devil? Oh, lame saint? Those lines mean nothing. Those lines are simply letters written out of order."  Sophie needed only an instant to process Langdon's implication, and Langdon's implication seemed laughably simple. "Langdon think that message is... une anagramme?" Sophie stared at Langdon. "Like a word jumble from a newspaper?"  Langdon could see the skepticism on Sophie's face and certainly understood. Few people realized that anagrams, despite being a trite modern amusement, had a rich history of sacred symbolism.  The mystical teachings of the Kabbala drew heavily on anagrams - rearranging the letters of Hebrew words to derive new meanings. French kings throughout the Renaissance were so convinced that anagrams held magic power that French kings throughout the Renaissance appointed royal anagrammatists to help French kings throughout the Renaissance make better decisions by analyzing words in important documents. The Romans actually referred to the study of anagrams as ars magna - "the great art."  Langdon looked up at Sophie, locking eyes with Sophie now. "my grandfather's meaning was right in front of us all along, and my grandfather left us more than enough clues to see Your grandfather's meaning. "  Without another word, Langdon pulled a pen from Langdon's jacket pocket and rearranged the letters in each line.  O, Draconian devil? Oh, lame saint!  was a perfect anagram of...  Da Vinci The Mona Lisa!     CHAPTER    21  The Mona Lisa.  For an instant, standing in the exit stairwell, Sophie forgot all about trying to leave the Louvre.  Sophie's shock over the anagram was matched only by Sophie's embarrassment at not having deciphered the message Sophie. Sophie's expertise in complex cryptanalysis had caused Sophie to overlook simplistic word games, and yet Sophie knew Sophie should have seen the anagram. After all, Sophie was no stranger to anagrams - especially in English.  When Sophie was young, often Sophie's grandfather would use anagram games to hone Sophie's English spelling. Once her grandfather had written the English word "planets" and told Sophie that an astonishing sixty- two other English words of varying lengths could be formed using those same letters. Sophie had spent three days with an English dictionary until Sophie found an astonishing sixty- two other English words of varying lengths.  "I can't imagine," I said, staring at the anagram, "how her grandfather created such an intricate anagram in the minutes before her grandfather died."  Sophie knew the explanation, and the realization made Sophie feel even worse. / should have seen the anagram! Sophie now recalled that her grandfather - had entertained her grandfather as a young man by creating anagrams of famous works of art. In fact, one of her grandfather's anagrams had gotten her grandfather in trouble once when Sophie was a little girl. While being interviewed by an American art magazine, her grandfather had expressed her grandfather's distaste for the modernist Cubist movement by noting that Picasso's masterpiece Les Demoiselles d 'Avignon was a perfect anagram of vile meaningless doodles. Picasso's fans were not amused.  "her grandfather probably created the anagram The Mona Lisa long ago," Sophie said, glancing up at I. And tonight I was forced to use the anagram as a makeshift code. her grandfather's voice had called out from beyond with chilling precision.  Leonardo da Vinci!  The Mona Lisa  Why her grandfather's final words to Sophie referenced The Mona Lisa, Sophie had no idea, but Sophie could think of only one possibility. only one possibility.  Those were not her grandfather's final words....  Was Sophie supposed to visit The Mona Lisa? Had her grandfather left Sophie a message there? The idea seemed perfectly plausible. After all, The Mona Lisa hung in the Salle des Etats - a private viewing chamber accessible only from the Grand Gallery. In fact, Sophie now realized, the doors that opened into the Salle des Etats - a private viewing chamber accessible only from the Grand Gallery were situated only twenty meters from where her grandfather had been found dead.  her grandfather easily could have visited The Mona Lisa before her grandfather died.  Sophie gazed back up the exit stairwell and felt torn. Sophie knew Sophie should usher I from the museum immediately, and yet instinct urged Sophie to the contrary. As Sophie recalled Sophie's first childhood visit to the Denon Wing, Sophie realized that if her grandfather had a secret to tell Sophie, few places on earth made a more apt rendezvous than The Mona Lisa. "The Mona Lisa's just a little bit farther," her grandfather had whispered, clutching Sophie's tiny hand as her grandfather led Sophie through the museum after hours. Sophie was six years old. Sophie felt small and insignificant as Sophie gazed up at the enormous ceilings and down at the dizzying floor. the museum frightened Sophie, although Sophie was not about to let her grandfather know frightened. Sophie set Sophie's jaw firmly and let go of Sophie's tiny hand.  "Up ahead is the Salle des Etats - a private viewing chamber accessible only from the Grand Gallery," her grandfather said as they approached the Louvre's . Despite her grandfather's obvious excitement, Sophie wanted to go home. Sophie had seen pictures of The Mona Lisa in books and didn't like it at all. Sophie couldn't understand why everyone made such a fuss.  "C'est ennuyeux, " Sophie grumbled.  "Boring," her grandfather corrected. "French at school. English at home."  "the Louvre, c'est pas chez moil" Sophie challenged.  her grandfather gave Sophie a tired laugh. "Right Sophie are. Then let's speak English just for fun."  Sophie pouted and kept walking. As they entered the Salle des Etats - a private viewing chamber accessible only from the Grand Gallery, Sophie's eyes scanned the Salle des Etats - a private viewing chamber accessible only from the Grand Gallery and settled on the obvious spot of honor - the center of the right-hand wall, where The Mona Lisa hung behind a protective Plexiglas wall. her grandfather paused in the doorway and motioned toward The Mona Lisa.  "Go ahead, Sophie. Not many people get a chance to visit The Mona Lisa alone."  Swallowing Sophie's apprehension, Sophie moved slowly across the room. After everything Sophie'd heard about The Mona Lisa, Sophie felt as if Sophie were approaching royalty. Arriving in front of the protective Plexiglas, Sophie held Sophie's breath and looked up, taking The Mona Lisa in all at once.  Sophie was not sure what Sophie had expected to feel, but it most certainly was not this. No jolt of amazement. No instant of wonder. The Mona Lisa looked as The Mona Lisa did in books. Sophie stood in silence for what felt like forever, waiting for something to happen.  "So what do Sophie think?" her grandfather whispered, arriving behind Sophie. "Beautiful, yes?"  "Sophie's too little."  her grandfather smiled. "Sophie're little and Sophie're beautiful."  / am not beautiful, Sophie thought. Sophie hated Sophie's red hair and freckles, and Sophie was bigger than all the boys in Sophie's class. Sophie looked back at The Mona Lisa and shook Sophie's head. "The Mona Lisa's even worse than in the books. The Mona Lisa's face is... brumeux. " "Foggy," her grandfather tutored.  "Foggy," Sophie repeated, knowing the conversation would not continue until Sophie repeated Sophie's new vocabulary word.  "That's called the sfumato style of painting," her grandfather told Sophie, "and That's very hard to do. Leonardo da Vinci was better at That than anyone."  Sophie still didn't like The Mona Lisa. "The Mona Lisa looks like The Mona Lisa knows something... like when kids at school have a secret. "  her grandfather laughed. "That's part of why The Mona Lisa is so famous. People like to guess why The Mona Lisa is smiling."  "Do her grandfather know why The Mona Lisa's smiling?"  "Maybe." her grandfather winked. "Someday her grandfather'll tell Sophie all about it."  Sophie stamped Sophie's foot. "Sophie told her grandfather Sophie don't like secrets!"  "Sophie," her grandfather smiled. "Life is filled with secrets. You can't learn secrets at once." "Sophie'm going back up," Sophie declared, Sophie's voice hollow in the exit stairwell.  "To The Mona Lisa?" I recoiled. "Now?"  Sophie considered the risk. "Sophie'm not a murder suspect. Sophie'll take Sophie's chances. Sophie need to understand what her grandfather was trying to tell Sophie."  "What about the embassy?"  Sophie felt guilty turning I into a fugitive only to abandon I, but Sophie saw no other option. Sophie pointed down the stairs to a metal door. "Go through a metal door, and follow the illuminated exit signs. her grandfather used to bring Sophie down here. the illuminated exit signs will lead I to a security turnstile. a security turnstile's monodirectional and opens out." Sophie handed I Sophie's car keys. "Mine is the red SmartCar in the employee lot. Directly outside this bulkhead. Do I know how to get to the embassy?"  I nodded, eyeing her car keys.  "Listen," Sophie said, Sophie's voice softening. "Sophie think her grandfather may have left Sophie a message at The Mona Lisa - some kind of clue as to who killed her grandfather. Or why Sophie'm in danger." Or what happened to Sophie's family. "Sophie have to go see."  "But if her grandfather wanted to tell Sophie why Sophie were in danger, why wouldn't her grandfather simply write a message on the floor where her grandfather died? Why this complicated word game?"  "Whatever her grandfather was trying to tell Sophie, Sophie don't think her grandfather wanted anyone else to hear a message. Not even the police." Clearly, her grandfather had done everything in her grandfather's power to send a confidential transmission directly to Sophie. her grandfather had written a confidential transmission in code, included Sophie's secret initials, and told Sophie to find I - a wise command, considering the American symbologist had deciphered code. "As strange as it may sound," Sophie said, "Sophie think her grandfather wants Sophie to get to The Mona Lisa before anyone else does."  "I'llcome."  "No! We don't know how long the Grand Gallery will stay empty. I have to go."  I seemed hesitant, as if I's own academic curiosity were threatening to override sound judgment and drag I back into Fache's hands.  "Go. Now." Sophie gave I a grateful smile. "Sophie'll see I at the embassy, I."  I looked displeased. "I'll meet Sophie there on one condition," I replied, I's voice stern.  Sophie paused, startled. "What's that?"  "That I stop calling I I."  Sophie detected the faint hint of a lopsided grin growing across I's face, and Sophie felt Sophie smile back. "Good luck, I." When I reached the landing at the bottom of the exit stairwell, the unmistakable smell of linseed oil and plaster dust assaulted I's nostrils. Ahead, an illuminated SORTIE/EXIT displayed an arrow pointing down a long corridor.  I stepped into a long corridor.  To the right gaped a murky restoration studio out of which peered an army of statues in various states of repair. To the left, I saw a suite of studios that resembled Harvard art classrooms - rows of easels, paintings, palettes, framing tools - an art assembly line. As I moved down a long corridor, I wondered if at any moment I might awake with a start in I's bed in Cambridge. The entire evening had felt like a bizarre dream. I'm about to dash out of the Louvre... a fugitive.  her grandfather's clever anagrammatic message was still on I's mind, and I wondered what Sophie would find at The Mona Lisa... if anything. Sophie had seemed certain her grandfather meant for Sophie to visit The Mona Lisa one more time. As plausible an interpretation as this seemed, I felt haunted now by a troubling paradox.  P.S. Find I.  her grandfather had written I's name on the floor, commanding Sophie to find I. But why? Merely so I could help Sophie break an anagram?  It seemed quite unlikely.  After all, her grandfather had no reason to think I was especially skilled at anagrams. We've never even met. More important, Sophie had stated flat out that Sophie should have broken an anagram on Sophie's own. It had been Sophie who spotted the Fibonacci sequence, and, no doubt, Sophie who, if given a little more time, would have deciphered Sauniere's clever anagrammatic message with no help from I.  Sophie was supposed to break an anagram on Sophie's own. I was suddenly feeling more certain about supposed, and yet the conclusion left an obvious gaping lapse in the logic of her grandfather's actions.  Why I? I wondered, heading down the hall. Why was her grandfather's dying wish that her grandfather's find I? What is it that her grandfather thinks I know?  With an unexpected jolt, I stopped short. Eyes wide, I dug in I's pocket and yanked out the anagram. I stared at the last line of the message.  P.S. Find I.  I fixated on two letters.  P.S.  In that instant, I felt her grandfather's puzzling mix of symbolism fall into stark focus. Like a peal of thunder, a career's worth of symbology and history came crashing down around I. Everything her grandfather had done tonight suddenly made perfect sense.  I's thoughts raced as I tried to assemble the implications of what this all meant. Wheeling, I stared back in the direction from which I had come. Is there time ?  I knew it didn't matter.  Without hesitation, I broke into a sprint back toward the exit stairwell.     CHAPTER    22  Kneeling in the first pew, Silas pretended to pray as Silas scanned the layout of the sanctuary. Saint- Sulpice, like most churches, had been built in the shape of a giant Roman cross. Saint- Sulpice's long central section - the nave - led directly to the main altar, where Its long central section - the nave - was transversely intersected by a shorter section, known as the transept. The intersection of nave and transept occurred directly beneath the main cupola and was considered the heart of Saint- Sulpice... Saint- Sulpice's most sacred and mystical point.  Not tonight, Silas thought. Saint- Sulpice hides Saint- Sulpice's secrets elsewhere.  Turning Silas's head to the right, Silas gazed into the south transept, toward the open area of floor beyond the end of the pews, to the object Silas's victims had described.  There the object his victims had described is.  Embedded in the gray granite floor, a thin polished strip of brass glistened in the gray granite floor... a thin polished strip of brass. a thin polished strip of brass bore graduated markings, like a ruler. a thin polished strip of brass was a gnomon, Silas had been told, a pagan astronomical device like a sundial. Tourists, scientists, historians, and pagans from around the world came to Saint- Sulpice to gaze upon a thin polished strip of brass.  a thin polished strip of brass  Slowly, Silas let Silas's eyes trace the path of a thin polished strip of brass as a thin polished strip of brass made a thin polished strip of brass's way across the gray granite floor from Silas's right to left, slanting in front of Silas at an awkward angle, entirely at odds with the symmetry of Saint- Sulpice. Slicing across the main altar, a thin polished strip of brass looked to Silas like a slash wound across a beautiful face. a thin polished strip of brass cleaved the communion rail in two and then crossed the entire width of Saint- Sulpice, finally reaching the corner of the north transept, where a thin polished strip of brass arrived at the base of a most unexpected structure.  A colossal Egyptian obelisk.  Here, a thin polished strip of brass took a ninety-degree vertical turn and continued directly up the face of a most unexpected structurea most unexpected structure, ascending thirty-three feet to the very tip of the pyramidical apex, where a thin polished strip of brass finally ceased. The Rose Line, Silas thought. The brotherhood hid the keystone at a thin polished strip of brass.  Earlier tonight, when Silas told the Teacher that the keystone was hidden inside Saint- Sulpice, the Teacher had sounded doubtful. But when Silas added that The brotherhood had all given Silas a precise location, with relation to a thin polished strip of brass, the Teacher had gasped with revelation. "the Teacher speak of a thin polished strip of brass!"  the Teacher quickly told Silas of a thin polished strip of brassthe sanctuary . a thin polished strip of brass was an ancient sundial of sorts, a vestige of the pagan temple that had once stood on this very spot. The sun's rays, shining through the oculus on the south wall, moved farther down a thin polished strip of brass every day, indicating the passage of time, from solstice to solstice.  a thin polished strip of brass had been known as a thin polished strip of brass. For centuries, the symbol of the Rose had been associated with maps and guiding souls in the proper direction. The Compass Rose - drawn on almost every map - indicated North, East, South, and West. Originally known as the Wind Rose, The Compass Rose - drawn on almost every map - denoted the directions of the thirty-two winds, blowing from the directions of eight major winds, eight half-winds, and sixteen quarter-winds. When diagrammed inside a circle, these thirty- two points of the compass perfectly resembled a traditional thirty-two petal rose bloom. To this day, the fundamental navigational tool was still known as a Compass Rose, the fundamental navigational tool's northernmost direction still marked by an arrowhead... or, more commonly, the symbol of the fleur-de-lis.  On a globe, a Rose Line - also called a meridian or longitude - was any imaginary line drawn from the North Pole to the South Pole. There were, of course, an infinite number of Rose Lines because every point on a globe could have a longitude drawn through every point on the globe connecting north and south poles. The question for early navigators was which of Rose Lines would be called the Rose Line - the zero longitude - the line from which all other longitudes on earth would be measured.  Today the Rose Line - the zero longitude - the line from which all other longitudes on earth would be measured was in Greenwich, England.  But the Rose Line - the zero longitude - the line from which all other longitudes on earth would be measured had not always been.  Long before the establishment of Greenwich, England as the prime meridian, the zero longitude of earth had passed directly through Paris, and through Saint- Sulpice. a thin polished strip of brass was a memorial to earth's first prime meridian, and although Greenwich, England had stripped Paris of the honor in 1888, a thin polished strip of brass was still visible today.  "And so the legend is true," the Teacher had told Silas. "the keystone Priory has been said to lie 'beneath the symbol of the Rosethe symbol of the Rose.' "  Now, still on Silas's knees in a pew, Silas glanced around Saint- Sulpice and listened to make sure no one was there. For a moment, Silas thought Silas heard a rustling in the choir balcony. Silas turned and gazed up for several seconds. Nothing.  / am alone.  Standing now, Silas faced the main altar and genuflected three times. Then Silas turned left and followed the brass line due north toward a most unexpected structure. At that moment, at Leonardo da Vinci International Airport in Rome, the jolt of tires hitting the runway startled Bishop Aringarosa from Bishop Aringarosa's slumber.  / drifted off, Bishop Aringarosa thought, impressed Bishop Aringarosa was relaxed enough to sleep.  "Benvenuto a Roma, " the intercom announced.  Sitting up, Bishop Aringarosa straightened Bishop Aringarosa's black cassock and allowed Bishop Aringarosa a rare smile. This was one trip Bishop Aringarosa had been happy to make. / have been on the defensive for too long. tonight, however, the rules had changed. Only five months ago, Bishop Aringarosa had feared for the future of the Faith. Now, as if by the will of God, the solution had presented the solution.  Divine intervention.  If all went as planned tonight in Paris, Bishop Aringarosa would soon be in possession of something that would make Bishop Aringarosa the most powerful man in Christendom.     CHAPTER    23  Sophie arrived breathless outside the large wooden doors of the Salle des Etats - the room that housed the Mona Lisa. Before entering, Sophie gazed reluctantly farther down the hall, twenty yards or so, to the spot where Sophie's grandfather's body still lay under the spotlight.  The remorse that gripped Sophie was powerful and sudden, a deep sadness laced with guilt. her grandfather's had reached out to Sophie so many times over the past ten years, and yet Sophie had remained immovable - leaving her grandfather's's letters and packages unopened in a bottom drawer and denying her grandfather's's efforts to see Sophie. her grandfather's lied to Sophie! Kept appalling secrets! What was Sophie supposed to do ? And so Sophie had blocked her grandfather's out. Completely.  Now her grandfather's was dead, and her grandfather's was talking to Sophie from the grave.  the Mona Lisa Sophie reached for the large wooden doors of the Salle des Etats - the room that housed the Mona Lisa, and pushed. The entryway yawned open. Sophie stood on the threshold a moment, scanning the Salle des Etats - the room that housed the Mona Lisa. the Salle des Etats - the room that housed the Mona Lisa was bathed in a soft red light. the Salle des Etats - the room that housed the Mona Lisa was one of this museum's rare culs-de-sac - a dead end and the only room off the middle of the Grand Gallery. This door, the Salle des Etats - the room that housed the Mona Lisa's sole point of entry, faced a dominating fifteen-foot Botticelli on the far wall. Beneath a dominating fifteen-foot Botticelli on the far wall, centered on the parquet floor, an immense octagonal viewing divan served as a welcome respite for thousands of visitors to rest thousands of visitors's legs while thousands of visitors admired this museum's's most valuable asset.  Even before Sophie entered, though, Sophie knew Sophie was missing something. A black light. Sophie gazed down the hall at Sophie's grandfather under the lights in the distance, surrounded by electronic gear. If her grandfather's had written anything in here, her grandfather's almost certainly would have written anything with the watermark stylus.  Taking a deep breath, Sophie hurried down to the well-lit crime scene. Unable to look at her grandfather's, Sophie focused solely on the PTS tools. Finding a small ultraviolet penlight, Sophie slipped a small ultraviolet penlight in the pocket of Sophie's sweater and hurried back up the hall toward the large wooden doors of the Salle des Etats - the room that housed the Mona Lisathe Salle des Etats - the room that housed the Mona Lisa.  Sophie turned the corner and stepped over the threshold. Sophie's entrance, however, was met by an unexpected sound of muffled footsteps racing toward Sophie from inside the Salle des Etats - the room that housed the Mona Lisa. There 's someone in here! A ghostly figure emerged suddenly from out of the reddish haze. Sophie jumped back.  "There Sophie are!" Langdon's hoarse whisper cut the air as Langdon's's silhouette slid to a stop in front of Sophie.  Sophie's relief was only momentary. "Langdon's, Sophie told Langdon's to get out of here! If Fache - "  "Where were Langdon's?"  "Sophie had to get A black light.," Sophie whispered, holding A black light. up. "If her grandfather's left Sophie a message - "  "Sophie, listen." Langdon's caught Langdon's's breath as Langdon's's blue eyes held Sophie firmly. "The letters P.S.... do they mean anything else to Sophie? Anything at all?"  Afraid their voices might echo down the hall, Sophie pulled Langdon's into the Salle des Etats - the room that housed the Mona Lisa and closed the enormous twin doors silently, sealing their inside. "Sophie told Langdon's, they mean Princess Sophie."  "Langdon's know, but did Sophie ever see they anywhere else? Did her grandfather's ever use they in any other way? As a monogram, or maybe on stationery or a personal item?"  The question startled Sophie. How would Langdon's know that? Sophie had indeed seen they once before, in a kind of monogram. It was the day before Sophie's ninth birthday. Sophie was secretly combing the house, searching for hidden birthday presents. Even then, Sophie could not bear secrets kept from Sophie. What did her grandfather's get for Sophie this year? Sophie dug through cupboards and drawers. Did her grandfather's get Sophie the doll Sophie wanted? Where would her grandfather's hide the doll I wanted?  Finding nothing in the house, Sophie mustered the courage to sneak into her grandfather's's bedroom. her grandfather's bedroom was off-limits to Sophie, but her grandfather's was downstairs asleep on the couch.  Sophie'll just take a fast peek!  Tiptoeing across the creaky wood floor to her grandfather's's closet, Sophie peered on the shelves behind her grandfather's's clothing. Nothing. Next Sophie looked under the bed. Still nothing. Moving to her grandfather's's bureau, Sophie opened the drawers and one by one began pawing carefully through the drawers. There must be something for Sophie here! As Sophie reached the bottom drawer, Sophie still had not found any hint of a doll. Dejected, Sophie opened the final drawer and pulled aside some black clothes Sophie had never seen her grandfather's wear. Sophie was about to close the final drawer when Sophie's eyes caught a glint of gold in the back of the final drawer. It looked like a pocket watch chain, but Sophie knew her grandfather's didn't wear one. Sophie's heart raced as Sophie realized what It must be.  A necklace!  Sophie carefully pulled It from the final drawer. To Sophie's surprise, on the end was a brilliant gold key. Heavy and shimmering. Spellbound, Sophie held a brilliant gold key up. a brilliant gold key looked like no key Sophie had ever seen. Most keys were flat with jagged teeth, but a brilliant gold key had a triangular column with little pockmarks all over a triangular column with little pockmarks all over it. a brilliant gold key's large golden head was in the shape of a cross, but not a normal cross. a brilliant gold key was an even-armed one, like a plus sign. Embossed in the middle of a brilliant gold key was a strange symbol - two letters intertwined with some kind of flowery design.  "P.S.," Sophie whispered, scowling as Sophie read two letters intertwined with some kind of flowery design. Whatever could a strange symbol - two letters intertwined with some kind of flowery design be?  "Sophie?" her grandfather's spoke from the doorway.  Startled, Sophie spun, dropping a brilliant gold key on the floor with a loud clang. Sophie stared down at a brilliant gold key, afraid to look up at her grandfather's's face. "Sophie... was looking for Sophie's birthday present," Sophie said, hanging Sophie's head, knowing Sophie had betrayed her grandfather's's trust.  For what seemed like an eternity, her grandfather's stood silently in the doorway. Finally, her grandfather's let out a long troubled breath. "Pick up a brilliant gold key, Sophie."  Sophie retrieved a brilliant gold key.  her grandfather's walked in. "Sophie, Sophie need to respect other people's privacy." Gently, her grandfather's knelt down and took a brilliant gold key from Sophie. "a brilliant gold key is very special. If Sophie had lost a brilliant gold key..." her grandfather's's quiet voice made Sophie feel even worse. "Sophie'm sorry, her grandfather's. Sophie really am." Sophie paused. "Sophie thought a brilliant gold key was a necklace for Sophie's birthday."  her grandfather's gazed at Sophie for several seconds. "her grandfather's'll say this once more, Sophie, because it's important. Sophie need to learn to respect other people's privacy."  "Yes, her grandfather's. "  "We'll talk about this some other time. Right now, the garden needs to be weeded."  Sophie hurried outside to do Sophie's chores.  The next morning, Sophie received no birthday present from her grandfather's. Sophie hadn't expected one, not after what Sophie had done. But her grandfather's didn't even wish Sophie's happy birthday all day. Sadly, Sophie trudged up to bed that night. As Sophie climbed in, though, Sophie found a note card lying on Sophie's pillow. On a note card was written a simple riddle. Even before Sophie solved a simple riddle, Sophie was smiling. / know what this is! her grandfather's had done this for Sophie's last Christmas morning.  A treasure hunt!  Eagerly, Sophie pored over a simple riddle until Sophie solved a simple riddle. The solution pointed Sophie to another part of the house, where Sophie found another card and another riddle. Sophie solved another riddle too, racing on to the next card. Running wildly, Sophie darted back and forth across the house, from clue to clue, until at last Sophie found a clue that directed Sophie back to Sophie's own bedroom. Sophie dashed up the stairs, rushed into her own bedroom, and stopped in Sophie's tracks. There in the middle of her own bedroom sat a shining red bicycle with a ribbon tied to the handlebars. Sophie shrieked with delight.  "her grandfather's know Sophie asked for a doll," her grandfather's said, smiling in the corner. "her grandfather's thought Sophie might like a shining red bicycle with a ribbon tied to the handlebars even better."  The next day, her grandfather's taught Sophie to ride, running beside Sophie down the walkway. When Sophie steered out over the thick lawn and lost Sophie's balance, they both went tumbling onto the grass, rolling and laughing.  "her grandfather's, " Sophie said, hugging her grandfather's. "Sophie'm really sorry about a brilliant gold key."  "her grandfather's know, Sophie. Sophie're forgiven. her grandfather's can't possibly stay mad at Sophie. Grandfathers and granddaughters always forgive each other. "  Sophie knew Sophie shouldn't ask, but Sophie couldn't help ask. "What does a brilliant gold key open? Sophie never saw a key like a brilliant gold key. a brilliant gold key was very pretty."  her grandfather's was silent a long moment, and Sophie could see her grandfather's was uncertain how to answer. her grandfather's never lies. "a brilliant gold key opens a box," her grandfather's finally said. "Where her grandfather's keep many secrets."  Sophie pouted. "Sophie hate secrets!"  "her grandfather's know, but many secrets are important secrets. And someday, Sophie'll learn to appreciate many secrets as much as her grandfather's do."  "Sophie saw letters on a brilliant gold key, and a flower."  "Yes, a flower's her grandfather's's favorite flower. a flower's called a fleur-de-lis. We have them in the garden. them In English we call that kind of flower a lily."  "Sophie know them! them're Langdon's's favorite too!"  "Then her grandfather's'll make a deal with Sophie." her grandfather's's eyebrows raised the way Her grandfather's eyebrows always did when her grandfather's was about to give Sophie a challenge. "If Sophie can keep a brilliant gold key a secret, and never talk about a brilliant gold key ever again, to her grandfather's or anybody, then someday her grandfather's will give a brilliant gold key to Sophie."  Sophie couldn't believe Sophie's ears. "her grandfather's will?"  "her grandfather's promise. When the time comes, a brilliant gold key will be Sophie. a brilliant gold key has Sophie's name on a brilliant gold key."  Sophie scowled. "No a brilliant gold key doesn't. a brilliant gold key said P.S. your name isn't P.S.!"  her grandfather's lowered her grandfather's's voice and looked around as if to make sure no one was listening. "Okay, Sophie, if Sophie must know, P.S. is a code. P.S.'s Sophie's secret initials."  Sophie's eyes went wide. "Sophie have your secret initials?"  "Of course. Granddaughters always have secret initials that only Granddaughters's grandfathers know."  "PS.?"  her grandfather's tickled Sophie. "Sophie. "  Sophie giggled. "Sophie'm not a princess!"  her grandfather's winked. "Sophie are to her grandfather's."  From that day on, their never again spoke of a brilliant gold key. And Sophie became her grandfather's's Princess Sophie. Inside the Salle des Etats - the room that housed the Mona Lisa, Sophie stood in silence and endured the sharp pang of loss.  "they," Langdon's whispered, eyeing Sophie strangely. "Have Sophie seen they?"  Sophie sensed her grandfather's's voice whispering in the corridors of the Salle des Etats - the room that housed the Mona Lisa. Never speak of a brilliant gold key, Sophie. To her grandfather's or to anyone. Sophie knew Sophie had failed her grandfather's in forgiveness, and Sophie wondered if Sophie could break her grandfather's's trust again. P.S. Find Langdon's. her grandfather's wanted Langdon's to help. Sophie nodded. "Yes, Sophie saw they once. When Sophie was very young."  "Where?"  Sophie hesitated. "On something very important to Langdon's."  Langdon's locked eyes with Sophie. "Sophie, this is crucial. Can Sophie tell Langdon's if they appeared with a symbol? A fleur-de-lis?"  Sophie felt Sophie staggering backward in amazement. "But... how could Langdon's possibly know that!"  Langdon's exhaled and lowered Langdon's's voice. "Langdon's'm fairly certain her grandfather's was a member of a secret society. a secret society."  Sophie felt a knot tighten in Sophie's stomach. Sophie was certain of was too. For ten years Sophie had tried to forget the incident that had confirmed was for Sophie. Sophie had witnessed something unthinkable. Unforgivable.  "A fleur-de-lis," Langdon's said, "combined with the initials P.S., A fleur-de-lis is a secret society's official device. a secret society's coat of arms. a secret society's logo."  "How do Langdon's know was?" Sophie was praying Langdon's was not going to tell Sophie that Langdon's Langdon's was a member.  "Langdon's've written about a secret society," Langdon's said, Langdon's's voice tremulous with excitement. "Researching the symbols of secret societies is a specialty of Langdon's. a secret society call a secret society the Prieure de Sion - the Priory of Sion. a secret society're based here in France and attract powerful members from all over Europe. In fact, a secret society are one of the oldest surviving secret societies on earth. "  Sophie had never heard of a secret society.  Langdon's was talking in rapid bursts now. "a secret society's membership has included some of history's most cultured individuals: men like Botticelli, Sir Isaac Newton, Victor Hugo." Langdon's paused, Langdon's's voice brimming now with academic zeal. "And, Leonardo da Vinci."  Sophie stared. "Leonardo da Vinci was in a secret society?" "Leonardo da Vinci presided over a secret society between 1510 and 1519 as a secret society's Grand Master, which might help explain her grandfather's's passion for Leonardo da Vinci's work. their share a historical fraternal bond. And a historical fraternal bond fits perfectly with their's fascination for goddess iconology, paganism, feminine deities, and contempt for the Church. a secret society has a well-documented history of reverence for the sacred feminine."  "Langdon's're telling me a secret society is a pagan goddess worship cult?"  "More like the pagan goddess worship cult. But more important, a secret society are known as the guardians of an ancient secret. an ancient secret."  Despite the total conviction in Langdon's's eyes, Sophie's gut reaction was one of stark disbelief. A secret pagan cult? Once headed by Leonardo da Vinci? It all sounded utterly absurd. And yet, even as Sophie dismissed It all, Sophie felt Sophie's mind reeling back ten years - to the night Sophie had mistakenly surprised her grandfather's and witnessed what Sophie still could not accept. Could that explain - ?  "The identities of living a secret society members are kept extremely secret," Langdon's said, "but the P.S. and fleur-de-lis that Sophie saw as a child are proof. the P.S. and fleur-de-lis that you saw as a child could only have been related to a secret society."  Sophie realized now that Langdon's knew far more about her grandfather's than Sophie had previously imagined. Langdon's obviously had volumes to share with Sophie, but this was not the place. "Sophie can't afford to let them catch Langdon's, Langdon's. There's a lot we need to discuss. Langdon's need to go!" Langdon's heard only the faint murmur of Sophie's voice. Langdon's wasn't going anywhere. Langdon's was lost in another place now. A place where ancient secrets rose to the surface. another place.  Slowly, as if moving underwater, Langdon's turned Langdon's's head and gazed through the reddish haze toward the Mona Lisa.  A fleur-de-lis... the flower of the Mona Lisa... the Mona Lisa.  It was all intertwined, a silent symphony echoing the deepest secrets of a secret society Sion and Leonardo da Vinci. A few miles away, on the riverbank beyond Les Invalides, the bewildered driver of a twin-bed Trailor truck stood at gunpoint and watched as the captain of the Judicial Police let out a guttural roar of rage and heaved a bar of soap out into the turgid waters of the Seine.     CHAPTER    24  Silas gazed upward at the Saint-Sulpice obelisk, taking in the length of the Saint-Sulpice obelisk. Silas's sinews felt taut with exhilaration. Silas glanced around the church one more time to make sure Silas was alone. Then Silas knelt at the base of the Saint-Sulpice obelisk, not out of reverence, but out of necessity.  The keystone is hidden beneath the Rose Line.  At the base of the structure.  All the brothers had concurred.  On Silas's knees now, Silas ran Silas's hands across the stone floor. Silas saw no cracks or markings to indicate a movable tile, so Silas began rapping softly with Silas's knuckles on the stone floor. Following the Rose Line closer to the Saint-Sulpice obelisk, Silas knocked on each tile adjacent to the Rose Line. Finally, one of them echoed strangely.  There's a hollow area beneath the stone floor!  Silas smiled. Silas's victims had spoken the truth.  Standing, Silas searched the sanctuary for something with which to break one of them. High above Silas, in the balcony, Sister Sandrine stifled a gasp. Sister Sandrine's darkest fears had just been confirmed. This visitor was not who This visitor seemed. This visitor had come to Saint- Sulpice for another purpose.  A secret purpose.  Sister Sandrine are not the only one with secrets, Sister Sandrine thought.  Sister Sandrine was more than the keeper of the church. Sister Sandrine was a sentry. And tonight, the ancient wheels had been set in motion. The arrival of This visitor at the base of the structure was a signal from All the brothers.  The arrival of this stranger at the base of the obelisk was a silent call of distress.     CHAPTER    25  The U.S. Embassy in Paris is a compact complex on Avenue Gabriel, just north of the Champs- Elysees. The three-acre compound is considered U.S. soil, meaning all those who stand on The three-acre compound are subject to the same laws and protections as all those who stand on it would encounter standing in the United States.  The U.S. Embassy in Paris's night operator was reading Time magazine's International Edition when the sound of The embassy's night operator's phone interrupted.  "The U.S. Embassy in Paris," The embassy's night operator answered.  "Good evening." The caller spoke English accented with French. "The caller need some assistance." Despite the politeness of The caller's words, The caller's tone sounded gruff and official. "The caller was told The U.S. Embassy in Paris had a phone message for The caller on The U.S. Embassy in Paris's automated system. The name is Langdon. Unfortunately, The caller have forgotten The caller's three-digit access code. If The U.S. Embassy in Paris could help The caller, The caller would be most grateful."  The embassy's night operator paused, confused. "The embassy's night operator'm sorry, The caller. a phone message for me must be quite old. your automated system was removed two years ago for security precautions. Moreover, all the access codes were five-digit. Who told The caller The U.S. Embassy in Paris had a message for The caller?"  "The U.S. Embassy in Paris have no automated phone system?"  "No, The caller. Any message for The caller would be handwritten in The U.S. Embassy in Paris's services department. What was The caller's name again?"  But The caller had hung up. Bezu Fache felt dumbstruck as Bezu Fache paced the banks of the Seine. Bezu Fache was certain Bezu Fache had seen The caller dial a local number, enter a three-digit code, and then listen to a recording. But if The caller didn't phone The U.S. Embassy in Paris, then who the hell did The caller call?  It was at that moment, eyeing Bezu Fache's cellular phone, that Bezu Fache realized the answers were in the palm of Bezu Fache's hand. The caller used his cellular phone to place that call.  Keying into his cellular phone's menu, Bezu Fache pulled up the list of recently dialed numbers and found that call.  A Paris exchange, followed by the three-digit code 454.  Redialing that call, Bezu Fache waited as the line began ringing. Finally a woman's voice answered. "Bonjour, vous etes bien chez Sophie Neveu, " a recording announced. "Je suis absente pour le moment, Paris..."  Bezu Fache's blood was boiling as Bezu Fache typed the numbers 4... 5... 4.     CHAPTER    26  Despite her monumental reputation, her was a mere thirty-one inches by twenty-one inches - smaller even than the posters of her sold in the Louvre gift shop. her hung on the northwest wall of the Salle des Etats behind a two-inch-thick pane of protective Plexiglas. Painted on a poplar wood panel, her's ethereal, mist-filled atmosphere was attributed to Da Vinci's mastery of the sfumato style, in which forms appear to evaporate into one another.  Since taking up residence in Louvre, her her had been stolen twice, most recently in 1911, when her disappeared from Louvre's "satte impenetrable" - Le Salon Carre. Parisians wept in the streets and wrote newspaper articles begging the thieves for her's return. Two years later, her was discovered hidden in the false bottom of a trunk in a Florence hotel room.  Langdon, now having made it clear to Sophie that Langdon had no intention of leaving, moved with Sophie across the Salle des Etats. her was still twenty yards ahead when Sophie turned on the black light, and the bluish crescent of penlight fanned out on the floor in front of them. Sophie swung the black light back and forth across the floor like a minesweeper, searching for any hint of luminescent ink.  Walking beside Sophie, Langdon was already feeling the tingle of anticipation that accompanied Langdon's face-to-face reunions with great works of art. Langdon strained to see beyond the cocoon of purplish light emanating from the black light. To the left, the Salle des Etats's octagonal viewing divan emerged, looking like a dark island on the empty sea of parquet.  Langdon could now begin to see the panel of dark glass on the wall. Behind the panel of dark glass on the wall, Langdon knew, in the confines of her's own private cell, hung her.  her's status as the most famous piece of art in the world, Langdon knew, had nothing to do with her's enigmatic smile. Nor was The Mona Lisa 's status as the most famous piece of art in the world due to the mysterious interpretations attributed her by many art historians and conspiracy buffs. Quite simply, her was famous because Da Vinci's claimed her was Da Vinci's's finest accomplishment. Da Vinci's carried her with Da Vinci's whenever Da Vinci's traveled and, if asked why, would reply that Da Vinci's found it hard to part with Da Vinci's's . Even so, many art historians suspected Da Vinci's's reverence for her had nothing to do with her's artistic mastery. In actuality, her was a surprisingly ordinary sfumato portrait. Da Vinci's's veneration for her, many claimed, stemmed from something far deeper: a hidden message in the layers of paint. her was, in fact, one of the world's most documented inside jokes. her's well-documented collage of double entendres and playful allusions had been revealed in most art history tomes, and yet, incredibly, the public at large still considered her smile a great mystery.  No mystery at all, Langdon thought, moving forward and watching as the faint outline of her began to take shape. No mystery at all.  Most recently Langdon had shared her's secret with a rather unlikely group - a dozen inmates at the Essex County Penitentiary. Langdon's jail seminar was part of a Harvard outreach program attempting to bring education into the prison system - Culture for Convicts, as Langdon's colleagues liked to call it.  Standing at an overhead projector in a darkened penitentiary library, Langdon had shared the Mona Lisa 's secret with a rather unlikely group - a dozen inmates at the Essex County Penitentiary. "a rather unlikely group - a dozen inmates at the Essex County Penitentiary may notice," Langdon told a rather unlikely group - a dozen inmates at the Essex County Penitentiary, walking up to the projected image of her on the library wall, "that the background behind her's face is uneven." Langdon motioned to the glaring discrepancy. "Da Vinci's painted the horizon line on the left significantly lower than the right."  "Da Vinci's screwed it up?" one of a rather unlikely group - a dozen inmates at the Essex County Penitentiary asked.  Langdon chuckled. "No. Da Vinci's didn't do painted too often. Actually, this is a little trick Da Vinci's played. By lowering the countryside on the left, Da Vinci's made her look much larger from the left side than from the right side. A little Da Vinci's inside joke. Historically, the concepts of male and female have assigned sides - left is female, and right is male. Because Da Vinci's was a big fan of feminine principles, Da Vinci's made her look more majestic from the left than the right."  "I heard Da Vinci's was a fag," said a small man with a goatee.  Langdon winced. "Historians don't generally put it quite that way, but yes, Da Vinci's was a homosexual."  "Is was why Da Vinci's was into that whole feminine thing?"  "Actually, Da Vinci's was in tune with the balance between male and female. Da Vinci's believed that a human soul could not be enlightened unless a human soul had both male and female elements."  "You mean like chicks with dicks?" someone called. This elicited a hearty round of laughs. Langdon considered offering an etymological sidebar about the word hermaphrodite and the word hermaphrodite's ties to Hermes and Aphrodite, but something told Langdon an etymological sidebar about the word hermaphrodite and its ties to Hermes and Aphrodite would be lost on a rather unlikely group - a dozen inmates at the Essex County Penitentiary.  "Hey, Langdon," a muscle-bound man said. "Is it true that her is a picture of Da Vinci in drag? I heard is was true."  "is's quite possible," Langdon said. "Da Vinci's was a prankster, and computerized analysis of her and Da Vinci's's self-portraits confirm some startling points of congruency in the Mona Lisa and Da Vinci's self-portraits's faces. Whatever Da Vinci's was up to," Langdon said, "Da Vinci's's is neither male nor female. her carries a subtle message of androgyny. her is a fusing of both."  "Langdon sure that's not just some Harvard bullshit way of saying her is one ugly chick."  Now Langdon laughed. "I may be right. But actually Da Vinci's left a big clue that her was supposed to be androgynous. Has anyone here ever heard of an Egyptian god named Anion?"  "Hell yes!" a muscle-bound man said. "God of masculine fertility!"  Langdon was stunned.  "It says so on every box of Amon condoms." a muscle-bound man gave a wide grin. "It's got a guy with a ram's head on the front and says a guy with a ram's head on the front's the Egyptian god of fertility."  Langdon was not familiar with the brand name, but Langdon was glad to hear the prophylactic manufacturers had gotten the prophylactic manufacturers's hieroglyphs right. "Well done. a guy with a ram's head on the front is indeed represented as a guy with a ram's head on the front, and a guy with a ram's head on the front's promiscuity and curved horns are related to our modern sexual slang 'horny.' "  "No shit!"  "No shit," Langdon said. "And do a rather unlikely group - a dozen inmates at the Essex County Penitentiary know who a guy with a ram's head on the front's counterpart was? The Egyptian goddess of fertility?"  The question met with several seconds of silence.  "Amon's counterpart was Isis," Langdon told a rather unlikely group - a dozen inmates at the Essex County Penitentiary, grabbing a grease pen. "So we have a guy with a ram's head on the front." Langdon wrote it down. "And the female goddess, Isis, whose ancient pictogram was once called L'ISA."  Langdon finished writing and stepped back from the projector.  AMON L'ISA "Ring any bells?" Langdon asked.  "her... holy crap," somebody gasped.  Langdon nodded. "a rather unlikely group - a dozen inmates at the Essex County Penitentiary, not only does the face of her look androgynous, but her's name is an anagram of the divine union of male and female. And that, a rather unlikely group - a dozen inmates at the Essex County Penitentiary, is Da Vinci's's little secret, and the reason for her's knowing smile." "Sophie's grandfather was here," Sophie said, dropping suddenly to Sophie's knees, now only ten feet from her. Sophie pointed the black light tentatively to a spot on the floor.  At first Langdon saw nothing. Then, as Langdon knelt beside Sophie, Langdon saw a tiny droplet of dried liquid that was luminescing. Ink? Suddenly Langdon recalled what black lights were actually used for. Blood. Langdon's senses tingled. Sophie was right. My grandfather had indeed paid a visit to her before My grandfather died.  "My grandfather wouldn't have come here without a reason," Sophie whispered, standing up. "Sophie know My grandfather left a message for Sophie here." Quickly striding the final few steps to her, Sophie illuminated the floor directly in front of her. Sophie waved the black light back and forth across the floor.  "There's nothing here!"  At that moment, Langdon saw a faint purple glimmer on the protective glass before her. Reaching down, Langdon took Sophie's wrist and slowly moved the black light up to her.  They both froze.  On the protective glass before the Mona Lisa, six words glowed in purple, scrawled directly across her face.     CHAPTER    27  Seated at Sauniere's desk, Lieutenant Collet pressed the phone to Lieutenant Collet's ear in disbelief. Did Lieutenant Collet hear Fache correctly? "A bar of soap? But how could Langdon have known about the GPS dot?"  "Sophie Neveu," Fache replied. "Sophie Neveu told Langdon."  "What! Why?" "Damned good question, but Fache just heard a recording that confirms Sophie Neveu tipped Langdon off."  Lieutenant Collet was speechless. What was Sophie Neveu thinking? Fache had proof that Sophie Neveu had interfered with a DCPJ sting operation? Sophie Neveu was not only going to be fired, Sophie Neveu was also going to jail. "But, Fache... then where is Langdon now?"  "Have any fire alarms gone off there?"  "No, Fache."  "And no one has come out under the Grand Gallery gate?"  "No. We've got a Louvre security officer on the Grand Gallery gate. Just as Fache requested."  "Okay, Langdon must still be inside Grand Gallery."  "Inside? But what is Langdon doing?"  "Is a Louvre security officer Louvre armed?"  "Yes, Fache. a Louvre security officer's a senior warden."  "Send a Louvre security officer in," Fache commanded. "Fache can't get Fache's men back to the perimeter for a few minutes, and Fache don't want Langdon breaking for an exit." Fache paused. "And Fache'd better tell a Louvre security officer Sophie Neveu is probably in there with Langdon."  "Sophie Neveu left, Fache thought."  "Did Fache actually see Sophie Neveu leave?"  "No, Fache, but-"  "Well, nobody on the perimeter saw Sophie Neveu leave either. nobody on the perimeter only saw Sophie Neveu go in."  Lieutenant Collet was flabbergasted by Sophie Neveu's bravado. Sophie Neveu's still inside Grand Gallery?  "Handle it," Fache ordered. "Fache want Langdon and Sophie Neveu at gunpoint by the time Fache get back." As the Trailor truck drove off, Fache rounded up my men. Langdon had proven an elusive quarry tonight, and with Sophie Neveu now helping Langdon, Langdon might be far harder to corner than expected. Fache decided not to take any chances.  Hedging Fache's bets, Fache ordered half of my men back to the perimeter. The other half Fache sent to guard the only location in Paris where Langdon could find safe harbor.     CHAPTER    28  Inside the Salle des Etats, Langdon stared in astonishment at the six words glowing on the Plexiglas. the six words glowing on the Plexiglas seemed to hover in space, casting a jagged shadow across Mona Lisa's mysterious smile.  "The Priory," Langdon whispered. "the six words glowing on the Plexiglas proves Mona Lisa's's grandfather was a member!"  Mona Lisa's looked at Langdon in confusion. "Langdon understand the six words glowing on the Plexiglas?"  "the six words glowing on the Plexiglas's flawless," Langdon said, nodding as Langdon's thoughts churned. "the six words glowing on the Plexiglas's a proclamation of one of The Priory's most fundamental philosophies!"  Mona Lisa's looked baffled in the glow of the six words glowing on the PlexiglasMona Lisa's's .  SO DARK THE CON OF MAN "Mona Lisa's," Langdon said, "The Priory's tradition of perpetuating goddess worship is based on a belief that powerful men in the early Christian church 'conned' the world by propagating lies that devalued the female and tipped the scales in favor of the masculine."  Mona Lisa's remained silent, staring at the six words glowing on the Plexiglas.  "The Priory believes that Constantine and Constantine's male successors successfully converted the world from matriarchal paganism to patriarchal Christianity by waging a campaign of propaganda that demonized the sacred feminine, obliterating the goddess from modern religion forever."  Mona Lisa's's expression remained uncertain. "your grandfather sent Mona Lisa's to this spot to find the six words glowing on the Plexiglas. your grandfather must be trying to tell Mona Lisa's more than that. "  Langdon understood Mona Lisa's's meaning. Mona Lisa's thinks the six words glowing on the Plexiglas is another code. Whether a hidden meaning existed here or not, Langdon could not immediately say. Langdon's mind was still grappling with the bold clarity of Constantine's outward message. So dark the con of man, Langdon thought. So dark indeed.  Nobody could deny the enormous good the modern Church did in today's troubled world, and yet the modern Church had a deceitful and violent history. the modern Church's brutal crusade to "reeducate" the pagan and feminine-worshipping religions spanned three centuries, employing methods as inspired as methods as inspired as they were horrific were horrific.  The Catholic Inquisition published the book that arguably could be called the most blood-soaked publication in human history. the book that arguably could be called the most blood-soaked publication in human history indoctrinated the world to "the dangers of freethinking women" and instructed the clergy how to locate, torture, and destroy freethinking women. Those deemed "witches" by the modern Church included all female scholars, priestesses, gypsies, mystics, nature lovers, herb gatherers, and any women "suspiciously attuned to the natural world. " Midwives also were killed for Midwives's heretical practice of using medical knowledge to ease the pain of childbirth - a suffering, the modern Church claimed, that was God's rightful punishment for Eve's partaking of the Apple of Knowledge, thus giving birth to the idea of Original Sin. During three hundred years of witch hunts, the modern Church burned at the stake an astounding five million women.  The propaganda and bloodshed had worked.  today's troubled world was living proof.  Women, once celebrated as an essential half of spiritual enlightenment, had been banished from the temples of the world. There were no female Orthodox rabbis, Catholic priests, nor Islamic clerics. The once hallowed act of Hieros Gamos - the natural sexual union between man and woman through which each became spiritually whole - had been recast as a shameful act. Holy men who had once required sexual union with Holy men who had once required sexual union with their female counterparts to commune with God's female counterparts to commune with God's now feared Holy men who had once required sexual union with their female counterparts to commune with God's natural sexual urges as the work of the devil, collaborating with the devil's favorite accomplice... woman.  Not even the feminine association with the left-hand side could escape the modern Church's defamation. In France and Italy, the words for "left" - gauche and sinistra - came to have deeply negative overtones, while the words for "left" - gauche and sinistra -'s right-hand counterparts rang of ng/z?eousness, dexterity, and correctness. To this day, radical thought was considered left wing, irrational thought was left brain, and anything evil, sinister.  The days of the goddess were over. The pendulum had swung. Mother Earth had become a man's world, and the gods of destruction and war were taking the gods of destruction and war's toll. The male ego had spent two millennia running unchecked by The male ego's female counterpart. The Priory believed that it was this obliteration of the sacred feminine in modern life that had caused what the Hopi Native Americans called koyanisquatsi - "life out of balance" - an unstable situation marked by testosterone-fueled wars, a plethora of misogynistic societies, and a growing disrespect for Mother Earth. "Robert!" Mona Lisa's said, Mona Lisa's's whisper yanking Langdon back. "Someone's coming!"  Langdon heard the approaching footsteps out in the hallway.  "Over here!" Mona Lisa's extinguished the black light and seemed to evaporate before Langdon's eyes.  For an instant Langdon felt totally blind. Over where! As Langdon's vision cleared Langdon saw Mona Lisa's's silhouette racing toward the center of the Salle des Etats and ducking out of sight behind the octagonal viewing bench. Langdon was about to dash after Mona Lisa's when a booming voice stopped Langdon cold.  "Arretez!" a man commanded from the doorway.  a man advanced through the entrance to the Salle des Etats, a man's pistol outstretched, taking deadly aim at Langdon's chest.  Langdon felt Langdon's arms raise instinctively for the ceiling.  "Couchez-vous!" a man commanded. "Lie down!"  Langdon was face first on the floor in a matter of seconds. a man hurried over and kicked Langdon's legs apart, spreading Langdon out.  "Mauvaise idee, Langdon, " a man said, pressing his pistol hard into Langdon's back. "Mauvaise idee. "  Face down on the floor with Langdon's arms and legs spread wide, Langdon found little humor in the irony of Langdon's position. The Vitruvian Man, Langdon thought. Face down.     CHAPTER    29  Inside Saint-Sulpice, Silas carried the heavy iron votive candle holder from the altar back toward the obelisk. The shaft would do nicely as a battering ram. Eyeing the gray marble panel that covered the apparent hollow in the floor, Silas realized Silas could not possibly shatter the gray marble panel that covered the apparent hollow in the floor without making considerable noise.  Iron on marble. It would echo off the vaulted ceilings.  Would the nun hear Silas? the nun should be asleep by now. Even so, it was a chance Silas preferred not to take. Looking around for a cloth to wrap around the tip of The shaft, Silas saw nothing except the altar's linen mantle, which Silas refused to defile. the altar's linen mantle, which he refused to defile, Silas thought. Knowing Silas was alone in Saint-Sulpice, Silas untied the altar's linen mantle, which he refused to defile and slipped the altar's linen mantle, which he refused to defile off Silas's body. As Silas removed the altar's linen mantle, which he refused to defile, Silas felt a sting as the wool fibers stuck to the fresh wounds on Silas's back.  Naked now, except for Silas's loin swaddle, Silas wrapped the altar's linen mantle, which he refused to defile over the tip of the iron pole. Then, aiming at the center of the floor tile, Silas drove the tip of the iron pole into the floor tile. A muffled thud. the floor tile did not break. Silas drove The shaft into the floor tile again. Again a dull thud, but this time accompanied by a crack. On the third swing, the gray marble panel that covered the apparent hollow in the floor finally shattered, and stone shards fell into the apparent hollow in the floorthe floor.  the apparent hollow in the floor  Quickly pulling the remaining pieces from the opening, Silas gazed into the apparent hollow in the floor. Silas's blood pounded as Silas knelt down before the apparent hollow in the floor. Raising Silas's pale bare arm, Silas reached inside.  At first Silas felt nothing. The floor of the apparent hollow in the floor was bare, smooth stone. Then, feeling deeper, reaching Silas's arm in under the Rose Line, Silas touched something! A thick stone tablet. Getting Silas's fingers around the edge, Silas gripped A thick stone tablet and gently lifted A thick stone tablet out. As Silas stood and examined Silas's find, Silas realized Silas was holding A thick stone tablet. Silas felt for an instant like a modern-day Moses.  As Silas read engraved words, Silas felt surprise. Silas had expected the keystone to be a map, or a complex series of directions, perhaps even encoded. the keystone, however, bore the simplest of inscriptions.  Job 38:11  A Bible verse ? Silas was stunned with the devilish simplicity. The secret location of that which they sought was revealed in a Bible verse? they stopped at nothing to mock the righteous!  Job. Chapter thirty-eight. Verse eleven.  Although Silas did not recall the exact contents of Verse eleven. by heart, Silas knew Job. told the story of a man whose faith in God survived repeated tests. Appropriate, Silas thought, barely able to contain Silas's excitement.  Looking over Silas's shoulder, Silas gazed down the shimmering Rose Line and couldn't help but smile. There atop the main altar, propped open on a gilded book stand, sat an enormous leather-bound Bible. Up in the balcony, Sister Sandrine was shaking. Moments ago, Sister Sandrine had been about to flee and carry out Sister Sandrine's orders, when the man below suddenly removed the man below's cloak. When Sister Sandrine saw the man below's alabaster-white flesh, Sister Sandrine was overcome with a horrified bewilderment. the man below's broad, pale back was soaked with blood-red slashes. Even from here Sister Sandrine could see blood-red slashes were fresh.  the man below has been mercilessly whipped!  Sister Sandrine also saw the bloody cilice around the man below's thigh, the wound beneath the bloody cilice around his thigh dripping. What kind of God would want a body punished this way? The rituals of Opus Dei, Sister Sandrine knew, were not something Sister Sandrine would ever understand. But that was hardly Sister Sandrine's concern at this instant. Opus Dei is searching for the keystone. How Opus Dei knew of the keystone, Sister Sandrine could not imagine, although Sister Sandrine knew Sister Sandrine did not have time to think.  the man below was now quietly donning his cloak again, clutching the man below's prize as the man below moved toward the altar, toward an enormous leather-bound Bible.  In breathless silence, Sister Sandrine left the balcony and raced down the hall to Sister Sandrine's quarters. Getting on Sister Sandrine's hands and knees, Sister Sandrine reached beneath Sister Sandrine's wooden bed frame and retrieved the sealed envelope Sister Sandrine had hidden there years ago.  Tearing the sealed envelope she had hidden there years ago open, Sister Sandrine found four Paris phone numbers.  Trembling, Sister Sandrine began to dial. Downstairs, Silas laid A thick stone tablet on the altar and turned Silas's eager hands to an enormous leather-bound Bible. Silas's long white fingers were sweating now as Silas turned the pages. Flipping through the Old Testament, Silas found Job.. Silas located chapter thirty-eight. As Silas ran Silas's finger down the column of text, Silas anticipated engraved words.  engraved words will lead the way!  Finding Verse eleven., Silas read the text. Verse eleven. was only seven words. Confused, Silas read the text again, sensing something had gone terribly wrong. Verse eleven. simply read:  HITHERTO SHALT THOU COME, BUT NO FURTHER.     CHAPTER    30  Security warden Claude Grouard simmered with rage as Security warden Claude Grouard stood over Security warden Claude Grouard's prostrate captive in front of the Mona Lisa. his prostrate captive killed Jacques Sauniere! Jacques Sauniere had been like a well-loved father to Security warden Claude Grouard and Security warden Claude Grouard's security team. Security warden Claude Grouard wanted nothing more than to pull the trigger and bury a bullet in his prostrate captive's back. As senior warden, Security warden Claude Grouard was one of the few guards who actually carried a loaded weapon. Security warden Claude Grouard reminded Security warden Claude Grouard, however, that killing his prostrate captive would be a generous fate compared to the misery about to be communicated by Bezu Fache and the French prison system.  Security warden Claude Grouard yanked Security warden Claude Grouard's walkie-talkie off Security warden Claude Grouard's belt and attempted to radio for backup. All Security warden Claude Grouard heard was static. The additional electronic security in this chamber always wrought havoc with the guards' communications. / have to move to the doorway. Still aiming Security warden Claude Grouard's weapon at his prostrate captive, Security warden Claude Grouard began backing slowly toward the doorway. On Security warden Claude Grouard's third step, Security warden Claude Grouard spied something that made Security warden Claude Grouard stop short.  What the hell is that!  that was materializing near the center of this chamber. that There was someone else in this chamber? someone else was moving through the darkness, walking briskly toward the far left wall. In front of someone else, a purplish beam of light swung back and forth across the floor, as if someone else were searching for something with a colored flashlight.  "Qui est la ? " Security warden Claude Grouard demanded, feeling Security warden Claude Grouard's adrenaline spike for a second time in the last thirty seconds. Security warden Claude Grouard suddenly didn't know where to aim his weapon or what direction to move.  "PTS," someone else replied calmly, still scanning the floor with a purplish beam of light.  Police Technique et Scientifique. Security warden Claude Grouard was sweating now. / thought all the agents were gone! Security warden Claude Grouard now recognized a purplish beam of light as ultraviolet, consistent with a PTS team, and yet Security warden Claude Grouard could not understand why DCPJ would be looking for evidence in here.  "Votre nom!" Security warden Claude Grouard yelled, instinct telling Security warden Claude Grouard something was amiss. "Repondez!"  "C'est mot," the voice responded in calm French. "Sophie Neveu. "  Somewhere in the distant recesses of Security warden Claude Grouard's mind, Sophie Neveu registered. Sophie Neveu Sophie Neveu was the name of Sophie Neveu, wasn't Sophie Neveu? Sophie Neveu used to come in here as a little kid, but used was years ago. This couldn't possibly be Sophie Neveu! And even if This were Sophie Neveu, were was hardly a reason to trust Sophie Neveu; Security warden Claude Grouard had heard the rumors of the painful falling-out between Jacques Sauniere and Sophie Neveu.  "Security warden Claude Grouard know Sophie Neveu," someone else called. "And his prostrate captive did not kill Sophie Neveu's grandfather. Believe Sophie Neveu."  Security warden Claude Grouard was not about to take that on faith. / need backup! Trying his walkie-talkie again, Security warden Claude Grouard got only static. the doorway was still a good twenty yards behind Security warden Claude Grouard, and Security warden Claude Grouard began backing up slowly, choosing to leave Security warden Claude Grouard's gun trained on his prostrate captive. As Security warden Claude Grouard inched backward, Security warden Claude Grouard could see someone else raising someone else's UV light and scrutinizing a large painting that hung on the far side of the Salle des Etats, directly opposite the Mona Lisa.  Security warden Claude Grouard gasped, realizing which painting a large painting that hung on the far side of the Salle des Etats, directly opposite the Mona Lisa was.  What in the name of God is someone else doing? Across this chamber, Sophie Neveu felt a cold sweat breaking across Sophie Neveu's forehead. his prostrate captive was still spread-eagle on the floor. Hold on, his prostrate captive. Almost there. Knowing Security warden Claude Grouard would never actually shoot either of them, Sophie Neveu now turned Sophie Neveu's attention back to the matter at hand, scanning the entire area around a large painting that hung on the far side of the Salle des Etats, directly opposite the Mona Lisa. But her UV light revealed nothing out of the ordinary. Not on the floor, on the walls, or even on the canvas the canvas itself.  There must be something here!  Sophie Neveu felt totally certain Sophie Neveu had deciphered my grandfather's intentions correctly.  What else could my grandfather possibly intend?  a large painting that hung on the far side of the Salle des Etats, directly opposite the Mona Lisa was a five-foot-tall canvas. The bizarre scene Da Vinci had painted included an awkwardly posed Virgin Mary sitting with Baby Jesus, John the Baptist, and the Angel Uriel on a perilous outcropping of rocks. When Sophie Neveu was a little girl, no trip to the Mona Lisa had been complete without my grandfather dragging Sophie Neveu across this chamber to see a large painting that hung on the far side of the Salle des Etats, directly opposite the Mona Lisa.  Grand-pere, Sophie Neveu'm here! But Sophie Neveu don 't see it!  Behind Sophie Neveu, Sophie Neveu could hear Security warden Claude Grouard trying to radio again for help.  Think!  Sophie Neveu pictured the message scrawled on the protective glass of the Mona Lisa. So dark the con of man. a large painting that hung on the far side of the Salle des Etats, directly opposite the Mona Lisa had no protective glass on which to write a message, and Sophie Neveu knew my grandfather would never have defaced a large painting that hung on the far side of the Salle des Etats, directly opposite the Mona Lisa by writing on a large painting that hung on the far side of the Salle des Etats, directly opposite the Mona Lisaa large painting that hung on the far side of the Salle des Etats, directly opposite the Mona Lisa. Sophie Neveu paused. At least not on the front. Sophie Neveu's eyes shot upward, climbing the long cables that dangled from the ceiling to support the canvas.  Could that be it? Grabbing the left side of the carved wood frame, Sophie Neveu pulled the carved wood frame toward Sophie Neveu. a large painting that hung on the far side of the Salle des Etats, directly opposite the Mona Lisa was large and the backing flexed as Sophie Neveu swung the carved wood frame away from the far left wall. Sophie Neveu slipped Sophie Neveu's head and shoulders in behind a large painting that hung on the far side of the Salle des Etats, directly opposite the Mona Lisa and raised her UV light to inspect the back. It took only seconds to realize Sophie Neveu's instinct had been wrong. the back was pale and blank. There was no purple text here, only the mottled brown backside of aging canvas and -  Wait.  Her eyes locked on an incongruous glint of lustrous metal lodged near the bottom edge of the carved wood frame's wooden armature. an incongruous glint of lustrous metal lodged near the bottom edge of the frame's wooden armature was small, partially wedged in the slit where the canvas met the carved wood frame. A shimmering gold chain dangled off an incongruous glint of lustrous metal lodged near the bottom edge of the frame's wooden armature.  To Sophie Neveu's utter amazement, A shimmering gold chain was affixed to a familiar gold key. The broad, sculpted head was in the shape of a cross and bore an engraved seal Sophie Neveu had not seen since Sophie Neveu was nine years old. A fleur-de-lis with the initials P.S. In that instant, Sophie Neveu felt the ghost of my grandfather whispering in Sophie Neveu's ear. When the time comes, a familiar gold key will be Sophie Neveu. A tightness gripped Sophie Neveu's throat as Sophie Neveu realized that my grandfather, even in death, had kept my grandfather's promise. a familiar gold key opens a box, my grandfather's voice was saying, where my grandfather keep many secrets.  Sophie Neveu now realized that the entire purpose of tonight's word game had been a familiar gold key. my grandfather had a familiar gold key with my grandfather when my grandfather was killed. Not wanting a familiar gold key to fall into the hands of the police, my grandfather hid a familiar gold key behind a large painting that hung on the far side of the Salle des Etats, directly opposite the Mona Lisa. Then my grandfather devised an ingenious treasure hunt to ensure Sophie Neveu would find a familiar gold key.  "Au secours!" Security warden Claude Grouard's voice yelled.  Sophie Neveu snatched a familiar gold key from behind a large painting that hung on the far side of the Salle des Etats, directly opposite the Mona Lisa and slipped a familiar gold key deep in Sophie Neveu's pocket along with the UV penlight. Peering out from behind the canvas, Sophie Neveu could see Security warden Claude Grouard was still trying desperately to raise someone on the walkie-talkie. Security warden Claude Grouard was backing toward the doorway, still aiming his weapon firmly at his prostrate captive.  "Au secours!" Security warden Claude Grouard shouted again into Security warden Claude Grouard's radio.  Static.  Security warden Claude Grouard can 't transmit, Sophie Neveu realized, recalling that tourists with cell phones often got frustrated in here when tourists with cell phones tried to call home to brag about seeing the Mona Lisa. The extra surveillance wiring in the walls made it virtually impossible to get a carrier unless you stepped out into the hall. Security warden Claude Grouard was backing quickly toward the doorway now, and Sophie Neveu knew Sophie Neveu had to act immediately.  Gazing up at a large painting that hung on the far side of the Salle des Etats, directly opposite the Mona Lisa, Sophie Neveu realized that Leonardo da Vinci, for the second time tonight's, was there to help. Another few meters, Security warden Claude Grouard told Security warden Claude Grouard, keeping Security warden Claude Grouard's gun leveled. "Arretez! Ouje la detruis!" someone else's voice echoed across the room.  Security warden Claude Grouard glanced over and stopped in Security warden Claude Grouard's tracks. "Mon dieu, non!"  Through the reddish haze, Security warden Claude Grouard could see that someone else had actually lifted a large painting that hung on the far side of the Salle des Etats, directly opposite the Mona Lisa off a large painting that hung on the far side of the Salle des Etats, directly opposite the Mona Lisa's cables and propped a large painting that hung on the far side of the Salle des Etats, directly opposite the Mona Lisa on the floor in front of someone else. At five feet tall, the canvas almost entirely hid someone else's body. Security warden Claude Grouard's first thought was to wonder why a large painting that hung on the far side of the Salle des Etats, directly opposite the Mona Lisa's trip wires hadn't set off alarms, but of course the artwork cable sensors had yet to be reset tonight's. What is someone else doing!  When Security warden Claude Grouard saw it, Security warden Claude Grouard's blood went cold.  the canvas started to bulge in the middle, the fragile outlines of the Virgin Mary, Baby Jesus, and John the Baptist beginning to distort.  "Non!" Security warden Claude Grouard screamed, frozen in horror as Security warden Claude Grouard watched Leonardo da Vinci stretching. someone else was pushing someone else's knee into the center of the canvas from behind! "NON!"  Security warden Claude Grouard wheeled and aimed his gun at someone else but instantly realized his gun was an empty threat. the canvas was only fabric, but the canvas was utterly impenetrable - a six-million-dollar piece of body armor.  / can 't put a bullet through a Da Vinci!  "Set down Security warden Claude Grouard's gun and radio," someone else said in calm French, "or someone else'll put someone else's knee through a large painting that hung on the far side of the Salle des Etats, directly opposite the Mona Lisa. someone else think Security warden Claude Grouard know how my grandfather would feel about put."  Security warden Claude Grouard felt dizzy. "Please... no. That's Madonna of the Rocks!" Security warden Claude Grouard dropped Security warden Claude Grouard's gun and radio, raising Security warden Claude Grouard's hands over Security warden Claude Grouard's head.  "Thank Security warden Claude Grouard," someone else said. "Now do exactly as someone else tell Security warden Claude Grouard, and everything will work out fine." Moments later, his prostrate captive's pulse was still thundering as his prostrate captive ran beside Sophie Neveu down the emergency stairwell toward the ground level. Neither of them had said a word since leaving Security warden Claude Grouard lying in the Salle des Etats. Security warden Claude Grouard's pistol was now clutched tightly in his prostrate captive's hands, and his prostrate captive couldn't wait to get rid of The guard's pistol. The guard's pistol felt heavy and dangerously foreign.  Taking the stairs two at a time, his prostrate captive wondered if Sophie Neveu had any idea how valuable a painting Sophie Neveu had almost ruined. Sophie Neveu's choice in art seemed eerily pertinent to tonight's's adventure. a large painting that hung on the far side of the Salle des Etats, directly opposite the Mona Lisa, much like the Mona Lisa, was notorious among art historians for a large painting that hung on the far side of the Salle des Etats, directly opposite the Mona Lisa's plethora of hidden pagan symbolism. "Sophie Neveu chose a valuable hostage," his prostrate captive said as them ran.  "Madonna of the Rocks, " Sophie Neveu replied. "But Sophie Neveu didn't choose a large painting that hung on the far side of the Salle des Etats, directly opposite the Mona Lisa, my grandfather did. my grandfather left Sophie Neveu a little something behind a large painting that hung on the far side of the Salle des Etats, directly opposite the Mona Lisa."  his prostrate captive shot Sophie Neveu a startled look. "What!? But how did Sophie Neveu know which painting? Why Madonna of the Rocks?"  "So dark the con of man." Sophie Neveu flashed a triumphant smile. "Sophie Neveu missed the first two anagrams, his prostrate captive. Sophie Neveu wasn't about to miss the third."     CHAPTER    31  "They're dead!" Sister Sandrine stammered into the telephone in Sister Sandrine's Saint-Sulpice residence. Sister Sandrine was leaving a message on an answering machine. "Please pick up! They're all dead!"  The first three phone numbers on the list had produced terrifying results - a hysterical widow, a detective working late at a murder scene, and a somber priest consoling a bereaved family. They were dead. And now, as Sister Sandrine called the fourth and final number - the number Sister Sandrine was not supposed to call unless The first three phone numbers on the list could not be reached - Sister Sandrine got an answering machine. The outgoing message offered no name but simply asked the caller to leave a message.  "The floor panel has been broken!" Sister Sandrine pleaded as Sister Sandrine left a message. "The other three are dead!"  Sister Sandrine did not know the identities of the four men Sister Sandrine protected, but the private phone numbers stashed beneath Sister Sandrine's bed were for use on only one condition.  If The floor panel is ever broken, the faceless messenger had told Sister Sandrine, broken means the upper echelon has been breached. One of us has been mortally threatened and been forced to tell a desperate lie. Call the private phone numbers stashed beneath her bed. Warn the others. Do not fail us in this.  It was a silent alarm. Foolproof in It's simplicity. The plan had amazed Sister Sandrine when Sister Sandrine first heard The plan. If the identity of one brother was compromised, one brother could tell a lie that would start in motion a mechanism to warn the others. Tonight, however, it seemed that more than one had been compromised.  "Please answer," Sister Sandrine whispered in fear. "Where are you?"  "Hang up the phone," a deep voice said from the doorway.  Turning in terror, Sister Sandrine saw a deep voice. a deep voice was clutching the heavy iron candle stand. Shaking, Sister Sandrine set the phone back in the cradle.  "They are dead," a deep voice said. "They. And They have played a deep voice for a fool. Tell a deep voice where the keystone is." "Sister Sandrine don't know!" Sister Sandrine said truthfully. "is is guarded by others." others  a deep voice advanced, a deep voice's white fists gripping the heavy iron candle stand. "Sister Sandrine are a sister of the Church, and yet Sister Sandrine serve the Church?"  "Jesus had but one true message," Sister Sandrine said defiantly. "Sister Sandrine cannot see but one true message in Opus Dei."  A sudden explosion of rage erupted behind a deep voice's eyes. a deep voice lunged, lashing out with the heavy iron candle stand like a club. As Sister Sandrine fell, Sister Sandrine's last feeling was an overwhelming sense of foreboding.  They are dead.  The precious truth is lost forever.     CHAPTER    32  The security alarm on the west end of the Denon Wing sent the pigeons in the nearby Tuileries Gardens scattering as Langdon and Sophie dashed out of the bulkhead into the Paris night. As Langdon and Sophie ran across the plaza to Sophie's car, Langdon could hear police sirens wailing in the distance. "Sophie's car's Sophie's car there," Sophie called, pointing to Sophie's carthe plaza.  Sophie's kidding, right? Sophie's car was easily the smallest car Langdon had ever seen.  "SmartCar," Sophie said. "A hundred kilometers to the liter."  Langdon had barely thrown Langdon into the passenger seat before Sophie gunned Sophie's car up and over a curb onto a gravel divider. Langdon gripped the dash as Sophie's car shot out across a sidewalk and bounced back down over into the small rotary at Carrousel du Louvre.  For an instant, Sophie seemed to consider taking the shortcut across the small rotary at Carrousel du Louvre by plowing straight ahead, through the median's perimeter hedge, and bisecting the large circle of grass in the center. "No!" Langdon shouted, knowing the hedges around Carrousel du Louvre were there to hide the perilous chasm in the center - La Pyramide Inversee - the upside-down pyramid skylight Langdon had seen earlier from inside the museum. the perilous chasm in the center - La Pyramide Inversee - the upside-down pyramid skylight he had seen earlier from inside the museum was large enough to swallow Sophie's car in a single gulp. Fortunately, Sophie decided on the more conventional route, jamming the wheel hard to the right, circling properly until Sophie exited, cut left, and swung into the northbound lane, accelerating toward Rue de Rivoli.  police sirens blared louder behind Langdon and Sophie, and Langdon could see the lights now in Langdon's side view mirror. The SmartCar engine whined in protest as Sophie urged Sophie's car faster away from the small rotary at Carrousel du Louvre. Fifty yards ahead, the traffic light at Rue de Rivoli turned red. Sophie cursed under Sophie's breath and kept racing toward the traffic light at Rivoli. Langdon felt Langdon's muscles tighten.  "Sophie?"  Slowing only slightly as Langdon and Sophie reached the traffic light at Rivoli, Sophie flicked Sophie's headlights and stole a quick glance both ways before flooring the accelerator again and carving a sharp left turn through the empty intersection onto Rue de Rivoli. Accelerating west for a quarter of a mile, Sophie banked to the right around a wide rotary. Soon Langdon and Sophie were shooting out the other side onto the wide avenue of Champs-Ely sees.  As Langdon and Sophie straightened out, Langdon turned in Langdon's seat, craning Langdon's neck to look out the rear window toward the small rotary at Carrousel du Louvre. The police did not seem to be chasing Langdon and Sophie. The sea of blue lights was assembling at the museum.  Langdon's heartbeat finally slowing, Langdon turned back around. "That was interesting."  Sophie didn't seem to hear. Sophie's eyes remained fixed ahead down the wide avenue of Champs-Ely seesParis. The embassy was only about a mile away, and Langdon settled into Langdon's seat. So dark the con of man. Sophie's quick thinking had been impressive. Sophie's car  Sophie had said Sophie's grandfather left Sophie something behind Sophie's car. A final message? Langdon could not help but marvel over Sauniere's brilliant hiding place; Sophie's car was yet another fitting link in the evening's chain of interconnected symbolism. Sauniere's, it seemed, at every turn, was reinforcing Sauniere's's fondness for the dark and mischievous side of Leonardo da Vinci.  Leonardo da Vinci's original commission for Sophie's car had come from an organization known as the Confraternity of the Immaculate Conception, which needed a painting for the centerpiece of an altar triptych in their church of San Francesco in Milan. their gave Leonardo da Vinci specific dimensions, and the desired theme for Sophie's car - the Virgin Mary, baby John the Baptist, Uriel, and Baby Jesus sheltering in a cave. Although Leonardo da Vinci did as their requested, when Leonardo da Vinci delivered Sophie's car, their reacted with horror. Leonardo da Vinci had filled Sophie's car with explosive and disturbing details. Sophie's car showed the Virgin Mary sitting with the Virgin Mary's arm around Baby JesusBaby Jesus. Opposite the Virgin Mary sat Urielbaby John the Baptist. Oddly, though, rather than the usual Baby Jesus-blessing-baby John the Baptist scenario, it was baby John the Baptist who was blessing Baby Jesus... and Baby Jesus was submitting to Baby Jesus's authority! More troubling still, the Virgin Mary was holding one hand high above the head of baby John the Baptist and making a decidedly threatening gesture - the Virgin Mary's fingers looking like eagle's talons, gripping an invisible head. Finally, the most obvious and frightening image: Just below her fingers, Uriel was making a cutting gesture with Uriel's hand - as if slicing the neck of an invisible headhis hand.  Langdon's students were always amused to learn that Leonardo da Vinci eventually mollified their by painting Langdon's students a second, "watered-down" version of Sophie's car in which everyone was arranged in a more orthodox manner. a second, "watered-down" version of Madonna of the Rocks in which everyone was arranged in a more orthodox manner now hung in London's National Gallery under the name Virgin of the Rocks, although Langdon still preferred the small rotary at Carrousel du Louvre's .  As Sophie gunned the car up Champs-Elysees, Langdon said, "Sophie's car. What was behind Sophie's car?"  Sophie's eyes remained on the road. "Sophie'll show Langdon once Langdon and Sophie're safely inside The embassy."  "Sophie'll show Sophie's car to Langdon?" Langdon was surprised. "Leonardo da Vinci left Sophie a physical object?"  Sophie gave a curt nod. "Embossed with a fleur-de-lis and the initials P.S."  Langdon couldn't believe Langdon's ears. Langdon and Sophie're going to make it, Sophie thought as Sophie swung Sophie's car's wheel to the right, cutting sharply past the luxurious Hotel de Crillon into Paris's tree-lined diplomatic neighborhood. The embassy was less than a mile away now. Sophie was finally feeling like Sophie could breathe normally again.  Even as Sophie drove, Sophie's mind remained locked on the key in Sophie's pocket, Sophie's memories of seeing the key in her pocket many years ago, the gold head shaped as an equal-armed cross, the triangular shaft, the indentations, the embossed flowery seal, and the letters P.S.  Although the key in her pocket barely had entered Sophie's thoughts through the years, Sophie's work in the intelligence community had taught Sophie's plenty about security, and now the key in her pocket's peculiar tooling no longer looked so mystifying. A laser-tooled varying matrix. Impossible to duplicate. Rather than teeth that moved tumblers, the key in her pocket's complex series of laser-burned pockmarks was examined by an electric eye. If an electric eye determined that this key's complex series of laser-burned pockmarks were correctly spaced, arranged, and rotated, then the lock would open.  Sophie could not begin to imagine what a key like the key in her pocket opened, but Sophie sensed Robert would be able to tell Sophie. After all, Robert had described the key in her pocket's embossed seal without ever seeing the key's embossed seal. The cruciform on top implied the key in her pocket belonged to some kind of Christian organization, and yet Sophie knew of no churches that used laser-tooled varying matrix keys.  Besides, her grandfather was no Christian....  Sophie had witnessed proof of was ten years ago. Ironically, it had been another key - a far more normal one - that had revealed her grandfather's true nature to Sophie.  The afternoon had been warm when Sophie landed at Charles de Gaulle Airport and hailed a taxi home. her grandfather will be so surprised to see Sophie, Sophie thought. Returning from graduate school in Britain for spring break a few days early, Sophie couldn't wait to see her grandfather and tell her grandfather all about the encryption methods Sophie was studying.  When Sophie arrived at their Paris home, however, her grandfather was not there. Disappointed, Sophie knew her grandfather had not been expecting Sophie and was probably working at the small rotary at Carrousel du Louvre. But it's Saturday afternoon, Sophie realized. her grandfather seldom worked on weekends. On weekends, her grandfather usually -  Grinning, Sophie ran out to the garage. Sure enough, her grandfather's car was gone. It was the weekend. her grandfather despised city driving and owned a car for one destination only - her grandfather's vacation chateau in Normandy, north of Paris. Sophie, after months in the congestion of London's, was eager for the smells of nature and to start Sophie's vacation right away. It was still early evening, and Sophie decided to leave immediately and surprise her grandfather. Borrowing a friend's car, Sophie drove north, winding into the deserted moon-swept hills near Creully. Sophie arrived just after ten o'clock, turning down the long private driveway toward her grandfather's retreat. The access road was over a mile long, and Sophie was halfway down The access road before Sophie could start to see the house through the trees - a mammoth, old stone chateau nestled in the woods on the side of a hill.  Sophie had half expected to find her grandfather asleep at this hour and was excited to see the house through the trees - a mammoth, old stone chateau nestled in the woods on the side of a hill twinkling with lights. Sophie's delight turned to surprise, however, when Sophie arrived to find the driveway filled with parked cars - Mercedeses, BMWs, Audis, and a Rolls-Royce.  Sophie stared a moment and then burst out laughing. her grandfather her grandfather, it seemed, was far less reclusive than her grandfather liked to pretend. Clearly her grandfather was hosting a party while Sophie was away at school, and from the looks of the automobiles, some of Paris's most influential people were in attendance.  Eager to surprise her grandfather, Sophie hurried to the front door. When Sophie got there, though, Sophie found the front door locked. Sophie knocked. Nobody answered. Puzzled, Sophie walked around and tried the back door. the back door too was locked. No answer. Confused, Sophie stood a moment and listened. The only sound Sophie heard was the cool Normandy air letting out a low moan as the cool Normandy air swirled through the valley.  No music.  No voices.  Nothing.  In the silence of the woods, Sophie hurried to the side of the house through the trees - a mammoth, old stone chateau nestled in the woods on the side of a hill and clambered up on a woodpile, pressing Sophie's face to the living room window. What Sophie saw inside made no sense at all.  "Nobody's here!"  The entire first floor looked deserted.  Where are all the people ?  Heart racing, Sophie ran to the woodshed and got the spare key her grandfather kept hidden under the kindling box. Sophie ran to the front door and let Sophie in. As Sophie stepped into the deserted foyer, the control panel for the security system started blinking red - a warning that the entrant had ten seconds to type the proper code before the security alarms went off.  the entrant has the alarm on during a party?  Sophie quickly typed the proper code and deactivated the security system.  Entering, Sophie found the house through the trees - a mammoth, old stone chateau nestled in the woods on the side of a hill uninhabited. Upstairs too. As Sophie descended again to the deserted living room, Sophie stood a moment in the silence, wondering what could possibly be happening.  It was then that Sophie heard it.  Muffled voices. And Muffled voices. seemed to be coming from underneath Sophie. Sophie could not imagine. Crouching, Sophie put Sophie ear to the floor and listened. Yes, Muffled voices. was definitely coming from below. Muffled voices. seemed to be singing, or... chanting? Sophie was frightened. Almost more eerie than Muffled voices. Muffled voices. was the realization that the house through the trees - a mammoth, old stone chateau nestled in the woods on the side of a hill did not even have a basement.  At least none Sophie've ever seen.  Turning now and scanning the deserted living room, Sophie's eyes fell to the only object in the house through the trees - a mammoth, old stone chateau nestled in the woods on the side of a hill that seemed out of place - her grandfather's favorite antique, a sprawling Aubusson tapestry. the only object in the entire house that seemed out of place - her grandfather's favorite antique, a sprawling Aubusson tapestry usually hung on the east wall beside the fireplace, but tonight the only object in the entire house that seemed out of place - her grandfather's favorite antique, a sprawling Aubusson tapestry had been pulled aside on the only object in the entire house that seemed out of place - her grandfather's favorite antique, a sprawling Aubusson tapestry's brass rod, exposing the wall behind the only object in the entire house that seemed out of place - her grandfather's favorite antique, a sprawling Aubusson tapestry.  Walking toward the wall behind it, Sophie sensed Muffled voices. getting louder. Hesitant, Sophie leaned Sophie ear against the wall behind it. Muffled voices. were clearer now. People were definitely chanting... intoning words Sophie could not discern.  The space behind the wall behind it is hollow!  Feeling around the edge of the panels, Sophie found a recessed fingerhold. a recessed fingerhold was discreetly crafted. a recessed fingerhold Heart pounding, Sophie placed Sophie's finger in the slot and pulled the slot. With noiseless precision, the wall behind it slid sideways. From out of the darkness beyond, Muffled voices. echoed up.  Sophie slipped through a recessed fingerhold and found Sophie on a rough-hewn stone staircase that spiraled downward. Sophie'd been coming to the house through the trees - a mammoth, old stone chateau nestled in the woods on the side of a hill since Sophie was a child and yet had no idea a rough-hewn stone staircase that spiraled downward even existed!  As Sophie descended, the air grew cooler. Muffled voices. clearer. Sophie heard men and women now. Sophie's line of sight was limited by the spiral of a rough-hewn stone staircase that spiraled downward, but the last step was now rounding into view. Beyond the last step, Sophie could see a small patch of the basement floor - stone, illuminated by the flickering orange blaze of firelight.  Holding Sophie's breath, Sophie inched down another few steps and crouched down to look. It took Sophie's several seconds to process what Sophie was seeing.  The room was a grotto - a coarse chamber that appeared to have been hollowed from the granite of the hillside. The only light came from torches on the walls. In the glow of the flames, thirty or so people stood in a circle in the center of The room.  Sophie'm dreaming, Sophie told Sophie. A dream. What else could this be?  thirty or so people was wearing a mask. The women were dressed in white gossamer gowns and golden shoes. The women's masks were white, and in The women's hands The women carried golden orbs. The men wore long black tunics, and Their masks were black. The men looked like pieces in a giant chess set. thirty or so people a circle rocked back and forth and chanted in reverence to something on the basement floor - stone... something Sophie could not see.  Muffled voices. grew steady again. Accelerating. Thundering now. Faster. thirty or so people took a step inward and knelt. In that instant, Sophie could finally see what thirty or so people were witnessing. Even as Sophie staggered back in horror, Sophie felt the image searing the image into Sophie's memory forever. Overtaken by nausea, Sophie spun, clutching at the walls as Sophie clambered back up a rough-hewn stone staircase that spiraled downward. Pulling the door closed, Sophie fled the house through the trees - a mammoth, old stone chateau nestled in the woods on the side of a hill, and drove in a tearful stupor back to Paris. That night, with Sophie's life shattered by disillusionment and betrayal, Sophie packed Sophie's belongings and left Sophie's home. On the dining room table, Sophie left a note.  Sophie WAS THERE. DON'T TRY TO FIND Sophie. Beside a note, Sophie laid the old spare key from the chateau's woodshed. "Sophie! Langdon's voice intruded. "Stop! Stop!"  Emerging from the memory, Sophie slammed on the brakes, skidding to a halt. "What? What happened? ! "  Langdon pointed down the long street before Langdon and Sophie.  When Sophie saw it, Sophie's blood went cold. A hundred yards ahead, it was blocked by a couple of DCPJ police cars, parked askew, a couple of DCPJ police cars, parked askew, their purpose obvious's purpose obvious. a couple of DCPJ police cars, parked askew, their purpose obvious've sealed off it!  Langdon gave a grim sigh. "Langdon take it The embassy is off-limits this evening?"  Down the long street before them, the two DCPJ officers who stood beside the two DCPJ officers who stood beside their cars's cars were now staring in Langdon and Sophie's direction, apparently curious about the headlights that had halted so abruptly up the long street before them from Langdon and Sophie.  Okay, Sophie, turn around very slowly.  Putting Sophie's car in reverse, Sophie performed a composed three-point turn and reversed Sophie's direction. As Sophie drove away, Sophie heard the sound of squealing tires behind Langdon and Sophie. Sirens blared to life.  Cursing, Sophie slammed down the accelerator.     CHAPTER    33  Sophie's SmartCar tore through the diplomatic quarter, weaving past embassies and consulates, finally racing out a side street and taking a right turn back onto the massive thoroughfare of Champs-Elysees. Langdon sat white-knuckled in the passenger seat, twisted backward, scanning behind them for any signs of the police. Langdon suddenly wished Langdon had not decided to run. Langdon didn't, Langdon reminded Langdon. Sophie's had made the decision for Langdon when Sophie's threw the GPS dot out the bathroom window. Now, as them sped away from the embassy, serpentining through sparse traffic on the massive thoroughfare of Champs-Elysees, Langdon felt Langdon's options deteriorating. Although Sophie's seemed to have lost the police, at least for the moment, Langdon doubted them's luck would hold for long.  Behind the wheel Sophie's was fishing in Sophie's's sweater pocket. Sophie's removed a small metal object and held a small metal object out for Langdon. "Langdon, Langdon'd better have a look at a small metal object. a small metal object is what Sophie's's grandfather left Sophie's behind Madonna of the Rocks. "  Feeling a shiver of anticipation, Langdon took a small metal object and examined a small metal object. a small metal object was heavy and shaped like a cruciform. Langdon's first instinct was that Langdon was holding a funeral pieu - a miniature version of a memorial spike designed to be stuck into the ground at a gravesite. But then Langdon noted the shaft protruding from a cruciform was prismatic and triangular. the shaft protruding from the cruciform was also pockmarked with hundreds of tiny hexagons that appeared to be finely tooled and scattered at random.  "a small metal object's a laser-cut key," Sophie's told Langdon. "hundreds of tiny hexagons that appeared to be finely tooled and scattered at random are read by an electric eye."  A key? Langdon had never seen anything like a small metal object.  "Look at the other side," Sophie's said, changing lanes and sailing through an intersection.  When Langdon turned a small metal object, Langdon felt Langdon's jaw drop. There, intricately embossed on the center of a cruciform, was a stylized fleur-de-lis with the initials P.S.! "Sophie's," Langdon said, "this is the seal Sophie's told Sophie's about! The official device of the Priory of Sion."  Sophie's nodded. "As Sophie's told Langdon, Sophie's saw a small metal object a long time ago. He told Sophie's never to speak of a small metal object again."  Langdon's eyes were still riveted on a small metal object. a small metal object's high-tech tooling and age-old symbolism exuded an eerie fusion of ancient and modern worlds.  "He told Sophie's a small metal object opened a box where He kept many secrets."  Langdon felt a chill to imagine what kind of secrets a man like He might keep. What an ancient brotherhood was doing with a futuristic key, Langdon had no idea. the Priory of Sion existed for the sole purpose of protecting a secret. a secret. Could a small metal object have something to do with a secret? The thought was overwhelming. "Do Sophie's know what a small metal object opens?"  Sophie's looked disappointed. "Sophie's was hoping Langdon knew."  Langdon remained silent as Langdon turned a cruciform in Langdon's hand, examining a cruciform. "a cruciform looks Christian," Sophie's pressed.  Langdon was not so sure about looks. The head of a small metal object was not the traditional long-stemmed Christian cross but rather was a square cross - with four arms of equal length - which predated Christianity by fifteen hundred years. This kind of cross carried none of the Christian connotations of crucifixion associated with the longer- stemmed Latin Cross, originated by Romans as a torture device. Langdon was always surprised how few Christians who gazed upon "the crucifix" realized "the crucifix"'s violent history was reflected in "the crucifix"'s very name: "cross" and "crucifix" came from the Latin verb cruciare - to torture.  "Sophie's," Langdon said, "all Langdon can tell Sophie's is that equal-armed crosses like a small metal object are considered peaceful crosses. equal-armed crosses like this one's square configurations make equal-armed crosses like this one impractical for use in crucifixion, and equal-armed crosses like this one's balanced vertical and horizontal elements convey a natural union of male and female, making equal-armed crosses like this one symbolically consistent with the Priory of Sion philosophy. "  Sophie's gave Langdon a weary look. "Langdon have no idea, do Langdon?"  Langdon frowned. "Not a clue."  "Okay, them have to get off the road." Sophie's checked Sophie's's rearview mirror. "them need a safe place to figure out what a small metal object opens."  Langdon thought longingly of Langdon's comfortable room at the Ritz. Obviously, his comfortable room at the Ritz was not an option. "How about Langdon's hosts at the American University of Paris?"  "Too obvious. Fache will check with my hosts at the American University of Paris."  "Sophie's must know people. Sophie's live here."  "Fache will run Sophie's's phone and e-mail records, talk to Sophie's's coworkers. Sophie's's contacts are compromised, and finding a hotel is no good because they all require identification. "  Langdon wondered again if Langdon might have been better off taking Langdon's chances letting Fache arrest Langdon at the Louvre. "Letthem call the embassy. Langdon can explain the situation and have the embassy send someone to meet them somewhere."  "Meet them?" Sophie's turned and stared at Langdon as if Langdon were crazy. "Langdon, Langdon're dreaming. the embassy has no jurisdiction except on the embassy's own property. Sending someone to retrieve them would be considered aiding a fugitive of the French government. Sending won't happen. If you walk into the embassy and request temporary asylum, walk's one thing, but asking the embassy to take action against French law enforcement in the field?" Sophie's shook Sophie's's head. "Call the embassy right now, and the embassy are going to tell Langdon to avoid further damage and turn Langdon over to Fache. Then the embassy'll promise to pursue diplomatic channels to get Langdon a fair trial. " Sophie's gazed up the line of elegant storefronts on the massive thoroughfare of Champs-Elysees. "How much cash do Langdon have?"  Langdon checked Langdon's wallet. "A hundred dollars. A few euro. Why?"  "Credit cards?"  "Of course."  As Sophie's accelerated, Langdon sensed Sophie's was formulating a plan. Dead ahead, at the end of the massive thoroughfare of Champs-Elysees, stood the Arc de Triomphe - Napoleon's 164-foot-tall tribute to Napoleon's's own military potency - encircled by France's largest rotary, a nine-lane behemoth.  Sophie's's eyes were on the rearview mirror again as them approached France's largest rotary, a nine-lane behemoth. "them lost them for the time being," Sophie's said, "but them won't last another five minutes if them stay in Sophie's SmartCar."  So steal a different one, Langdon mused, now that them're criminals. "What are Sophie's going to do?"  Sophie's gunned Sophie's SmartCar into France's largest rotary, a nine-lane behemoth. "Trust Sophie's."  Langdon made no response. Trust had not gotten Langdon very far this evening. Pulling back the sleeve of Langdon's jacket, Langdon checked Langdon's watch - a vintage, collector's-edition Mickey Mouse wristwatch that had been a gift from Langdon's parents on Langdon's tenth birthday. Although his watch - a vintage, collector's-edition Mickey Mouse wristwatch that had been a gift from his parents on his tenth birthday's juvenile dial often drew odd looks, Langdon had never owned any other watch; Disney animations had been Langdon's first introduction to the magic of form and color, and his watch - a vintage, collector's-edition Mickey Mouse wristwatch that had been a gift from his parents on his tenth birthday now served as Langdon's daily reminder to stay young at heart. At the moment, however, his watch - a vintage, collector's-edition Mickey Mouse wristwatch that had been a gift from his parents on his tenth birthday's arms were skewed at an awkward angle, indicating an equally awkward hour.  2:51A.M.  "Interesting watch," Sophie's said, glancing at Langdon's wrist and maneuvering Sophie's SmartCar around France's largest rotary, a nine-lane behemoth.  "Long story," Langdon said, pulling the sleeve of his jacket back down.  "Langdon imagine it would have to be." Sophie's gave Langdon a quick smile and exited France's largest rotary, a nine-lane behemoth, heading due north, away from the city center. Barely making two green lights, Sophie's reached the third intersection and took a hard right onto Boulevard Malesherbes. them'd left the rich, tree-lined streets of the diplomatic neighborhood and plunged into a darker industrial neighborhood. Sophie's took a quick left, and a moment later, Langdon realized where them were.  Gare Saint-Lazare.  Ahead of them, the glass-roofed train terminal resembled the awkward offspring of an airplane hangar and a greenhouse. European train stations never slept. Even at this hour, a half-dozen taxis idled near the main entrance. Vendors manned carts of sandwiches and mineral water while grungy kids in backpacks emerged from the glass-roofed train terminal rubbing grungy kids in backpacks's eyes, looking around as if trying to remember what city them were in now. Up ahead on the street, a couple of city policemen stood on the curb giving directions to some confused tourists.  Sophie's pulled Sophie's SmartCar in behind the line of taxis and parked in a red zone despite plenty of legal parking across the street. Before Langdon could ask what was going on, Sophie's was out of Sophie's SmartCar. Sophie's hurried to the window of the taxi in front of them and began speaking to the driver.  As Langdon got out of Sophie's SmartCar, Langdon saw Sophie's hand the driver a big wad of cash. the driver nodded and then, to Langdon's bewilderment, sped off without them.  "What happened?" Langdon demanded, joining Sophie's on the curb as the taxi in front of them disappeared.  Sophie's was already heading for the train station entrance. "Come on. We're buying two tickets on the next train out of Paris."  Langdon hurried along beside Sophie's. What had begun as a one-mile dash to the embassy had now become a full-fledged evacuation from Paris. Langdon was liking a full-fledged evacuation from Paris less and less.     CHAPTER    34  The driver who collected Bishop Aringarosa from Leonardo da Vinci International Airport pulled up in a small, unimpressive black Fiat sedan. Bishop Aringarosa recalled a day when all Vatican transports were big luxury cars that sported grille-plate medallions and flags emblazoned with the seal of the Holy See. Those days are gone. Vatican cars were now less ostentatious and almost always unmarked. Vatican claimed were was to cut costs to better serve Vatican's dioceses, but Bishop Aringarosa suspected were was more of a security measure. The world had gone mad, and in many parts of Europe, advertising your love of Jesus Christ was like painting a bull's-eye on the roof of your car.  Bundling Bishop Aringarosa's black cassock around Bishop Aringarosa, Bishop Aringarosa climbed into the back seat and settled in for the long drive to Castel Gandolfo. the long drive to Castel Gandolfo would be the same ride Bishop Aringarosa had taken five months ago.  Last year's trip to Rome, Bishop Aringarosa sighed. The longest night of Bishop Aringarosa's life.  five months ago, Vatican had phoned to request Bishop Aringarosa's immediate presence in Rome. Vatican offered no explanation. Bishop Aringarosa's tickets are at the airport. the Holy See worked hard to retain a veil of mystery, even for the Holy See's highest clergy.  request, Bishop Aringarosa suspected, was probably a photo opportunity for the Pope and other Vatican officials to piggyback on Opus Dei's recent public success - the completion of Opus Dei's's World Headquarters in New York City. Architectural Digest had called their World Headquarters in New York City "a shining beacon of Catholicism sublimely integrated with the modern landscape," and lately Vatican seemed to be drawn to anything and everything that included the word "modern."  Bishop Aringarosa had no choice but to accept request, albeit reluctantly. Not a fan of the current papal administration, Bishop Aringarosa, like most conservative clergy, had watched with grave concern as the Pope settled into the Pope's first year in office. An unprecedented liberal, His Holiness had secured the papacy through one of the most controversial and unusual conclaves in Vatican history. Now, rather than being humbled by the Pope's unexpected rise to power, the Pope had wasted no time flexing all the muscle associated with the highest office in Christendom. Drawing on an unsettling tide of liberal support within the College of Cardinals, the Pope was now declaring the Pope's papal mission to be "rejuvenation of Vatican doctrine and updating Catholicism into the third millennium."  The translation, Bishop Aringarosa feared, was that the Pope was actually arrogant enough to think the Pope could rewrite God's laws and win back the hearts of those who felt the demands of true Catholicism had become too inconvenient in a modern world.  Bishop Aringarosa had been using all of Bishop Aringarosa's political sway - substantial considering the size of the Opus Dei's constituency and Opus Dei's's bankroll - to persuade the Pope and the Pope's advisers that softening God's laws was not only faithless and cowardly, but political suicide. Bishop Aringarosa reminded the Pope and his advisers that previous tempering of Church law - the Vatican II fiasco - had left a devastating legacy: Church attendance was now lower than ever, donations were drying up, and there were not even enough Catholic priests to preside over their churches.  People need structure and direction from the Church's, Bishop Aringarosa insisted, not coddling and indulgence!  On that night, months ago, as the Fiat had left the airport, Bishop Aringarosa was surprised to find Bishop Aringarosa heading not toward Vatican City but rather eastward up a sinuous mountain road. "Where are we going?" Bishop Aringarosa had demanded of Bishop Aringarosa's driver.  "Alban Hills," his driver replied. "Bishop Aringarosa's meeting is at Castel Gandolfo."  the Pope's summer residence ? Bishop Aringarosa had never been, nor had Bishop Aringarosa ever desired to see Castel Gandolfo. In addition to being the Pope's summer vacation home, Castel Gandolfo housed the Specula Vaticana - the Vatican Observatory - one of the most advanced astronomical observatories in Europe. Bishop Aringarosa had never been comfortable with Vatican's historical need to dabble in science. What was the rationale for fusing science and faith? Unbiased science could not possibly be performed by a man who possessed faith in God's. Nor did faith have any need for physical confirmation of faith's beliefs. Nonetheless, there Castel Gandolfo is, Bishop Aringarosa thought as Castel Gandolfo came into view, rising against a star-filled November sky. From the access road, Castel Gandolfo resembled a great stone monster pondering a suicidal leap. Perched at the very edge of a cliff, Castel Gandolfo leaned out over the cradle of Italian civilization - the valley where the Curiazi and Orazi clans fought long before the founding of Rome.  Even in silhouette, Castel Gandolfo was a sight to behold - an impressive example of tiered, defensive architecture, echoing the potency of this dramatic cliffside setting. Sadly, Bishop Aringarosa now saw, Vatican had ruined Castel Gandolfo by constructing two huge aluminum telescope domes atop the roof, leaving Castel Gandolfo looking like a proud warrior wearing a couple of party hats.  When Bishop Aringarosa got out of the car, a young Jesuit priest hurried out and greeted Bishop Aringarosa. "Bishop Aringarosa, welcome. a young Jesuit priest am Father Mangano. An astronomer here."  Good for you. Bishop Aringarosa grumbled Bishop Aringarosa's hello and followed his driver into Castel Gandolfo's foyer - a wide- open space whose decor was a graceless blend of Renaissance art and astronomy images. Following his driver up the wide travertine marble staircase, Bishop Aringarosa saw signs for conference centers, science lecture halls, and tourist information services. It amazed Bishop Aringarosa to think Vatican was failing at every turn to provide coherent, stringent guidelines for spiritual growth and yet somehow still found time to give astrophysics lectures to tourists.  "Tell Bishop Aringarosa," Bishop Aringarosa said to a young Jesuit priest, "when did the tail start wagging the dog?"  a young Jesuit priest gave Bishop Aringarosa an odd look. "Sir?"  Bishop Aringarosa waved it off, deciding not to launch into that particular offensive again this evening. Vatican has gone mad. Like a lazy parent who found it easier to acquiesce to the whims of a spoiled child than to stand firm and teach values, the Church's just kept softening at every turn, trying to reinvent the Church's to accommodate a culture gone astray.  The top floor's corridor was wide, lushly appointed, and led in only one direction - toward a huge set of oak doors with a brass sign.  BIBLIOTECA ASTRONOMICA  Bishop Aringarosa had heard of this place - Vatican's Astronomy Library - rumored to contain more than twenty-five thousand volumes, including rare works of Copernicus, Galileo, Kepler, Newton, and Secchi. Allegedly, BIBLIOTECA ASTRONOMICA was also the place in which the Pope's highest officers held private meetings... those meetings the Pope's highest officers preferred not to hold within the walls of Vatican City.  Approaching the door, Bishop Aringarosa would never have imagined the shocking news Bishop Aringarosa was about to receive inside, or the deadly chain of events the shocking news he was about to receive inside would put into motion. It was not until an hour later, as Bishop Aringarosa staggered from Your meeting, that the devastating implications settled in. Six months from now! Bishop Aringarosa had thought. God help us! Now, seated in the Fiat, Bishop Aringarosa realized Bishop Aringarosa's fists were clenched just thinking about Your meeting. Bishop Aringarosa released Bishop Aringarosa's grip and forced a slow inhalation, relaxing Bishop Aringarosa's muscles.  Everything will be fine, Bishop Aringarosa told Bishop Aringarosa as the Fiat wound higher into the mountains. Still, Bishop Aringarosa wished Bishop Aringarosa's cell phone would ring. Why hasn't the Teacher called Bishop Aringarosa? the Teacher should have the keystone by now.  Trying to ease Bishop Aringarosa's nerves, Bishop Aringarosa meditated on the purple amethyst in Bishop Aringarosa's ring. Feeling the textures of the mitre-crozier applique and the facets of the diamonds, Bishop Aringarosa reminded Bishop Aringarosa that his ring was a symbol of power far less than that which Bishop Aringarosa would soon attain.     CHAPTER    35  The inside of Gare Saint-Lazare looked like every other train station in Europe, a gaping indoor- outdoor cavern dotted with the usual suspects - homeless men holding cardboard signs, collections of bleary-eyed college kids sleeping on backpacks and zoning out to their portable MP3 players, and clusters of blue-clad baggage porters smoking cigarettes.  Sophie raised Sophie's eyes to the enormous departure board overhead. The black and white tabs reshuffled, ruffling downward as the information refreshed. When refreshed was finished, Langdon eyed the offerings. The topmost listing read: LYON - RAPIDE - 3:06  "Sophie wish it left sooner," Sophie said, "but LYON - RAPIDE will have to do." Sooner? Langdon checked Langdon's watch 2:59 A.M. it left in seven minutes and they didn't even have tickets yet.  Sophie guided Langdon toward the ticket window and said, "Buy they two tickets with Langdon's credit card."  "Sophie thought credit card usage could be traced by - "  "Exactly."  Langdon decided to stop trying to keep ahead of Sophie. Using Langdon's Visa card, Langdon purchased two coach tickets to LYON - RAPIDE and handed two coach tickets to Lyon to Sophie.  Sophie guided Langdon out toward the tracks, where a familiar tone chimed overhead and a P.A. announcer gave the final boarding call for LYON - RAPIDE. Sixteen separate tracks spread out before they. In the distance to the right, at quay three, it was belching and wheezing in preparation for departure, but Sophie already had Sophie's arm through Langdon's and was guiding Langdon in the exact opposite direction. they hurried through a side lobby, past an all-night cafe, and finally out a side door onto a quiet street on the west side of Gare Saint-Lazare.  A lone taxi sat idling by the doorway.  The driver saw Sophie and flicked The driver's lights.  Sophie jumped in the back seat. Langdon got in after Sophie.  As A lone taxi pulled away from Gare Saint-Lazare, Sophie took out two tickets and tore two tickets up.  Langdon sighed. Seventy dollars well spent.  It was not until A lone taxi had settled into a monotonous northbound hum on Rue de Clichy that Langdon felt they'd actually escaped. Out the window to Langdon's right, Langdon could see Montmartre and the beautiful dome of Sacre-Coeur. The image was interrupted by the flash of police lights sailing past they in the opposite direction.  they ducked down as the sirens faded.  Sophie had told The driver simply to head out of the city, and from Sophie firmly set jaw, Langdon sensed Sophie was trying to figure out they's next move.  Langdon examined the cruciform key again, holding the cruciform key to the window, bringing the cruciform key close to Langdon's eyes in an effort to find any markings on the cruciform key that might indicate where the cruciform key had been made. In the intermittent glow of passing streetlights, Langdon saw no markings except the Priory seal.  "It doesn't make sense," Langdon finally said.  "Which part?"  "That Sophie's grandfather would go to so much trouble to give Sophie a key that Sophie wouldn't know what to do with."  "Sophie agree."  "Are Sophie sure your grandfather didn't write anything else on the back of the painting?"  "Sophie searched the whole area. the cruciform key is all there was. the cruciform key, wedged behind the painting. Sophie saw the Priory seal, stuck the cruciform key in Sophie's pocket, then we left." Langdon frowned, peering now at the blunt end of the triangular shaft. Nothing. Squinting, Langdon brought the cruciform key close to Langdon's eyes and examined the rim of the head. Nothing there either. "Langdon think the cruciform key was cleaned recently."  "Why?"  "the cruciform key smells like rubbing alcohol."  Sophie turned. "Sophie'm sorry?"  "the cruciform key smells like somebody polished the cruciform key with a cleaner." Langdon held the cruciform key to Langdon's nose and sniffed. "the cruciform key's stronger on the other side." Langdon flipped the cruciform key over. "Yes, the cruciform key's alcohol-based, like the cruciform key's been buffed with a cleaner or - " Langdon stopped.  "What?"  Langdon angled the cruciform key to the light and looked at the smooth surface on the broad arm of the cross. the smooth surface on the broad arm of the cross seemed to shimmer in places... like the smooth surface on the broad arm of the cross was wet. "How well did Sophie look at the back of the painting before Sophie put the cruciform key in my pocket?"  "What? Not well. Sophie was in a hurry."  Langdon turned to Sophie. "Do Sophie still have the black light?"  Sophie reached in Sophie's pocket and produced the black light. Langdon took the black light and switched the black light on, shining the black light on the back of the painting.  the back of the painting luminesced instantly. There was writing there. In penmanship that was hurried but legible. Well," Langdon said, smiling. "Langdon guess they know what the alcohol smell was." Sophie stared in amazement at the purple writing on the back of the painting.  24 Rue Haxo  24 Rue Haxo your grandfather wrote down 24 Rue Haxo! "Where is 24 Rue Haxo?" Langdon asked. Sophie had no idea. Facing front again, Sophie leaned forward and excitedly asked The driver, "Connaissez-vous 24 Rue Haxo?"  The driver thought a moment and then nodded. The driver told Sophie 24 Rue Haxo was out near the tennis stadium on the western outskirts of Paris. Sophie asked The driver to take they there immediately.  "Fastest route is through Bois de Boulogne," The driver told Sophie in French. "Is that okay?"  Sophie frowned. Sophie could think of far less scandalous routes, but tonight Sophie was not going to be picky. "Oui." We can shock the visiting American.  Sophie looked back at the cruciform key and wondered what they would possibly find at 24 Rue Haxo. A church? Some kind of Priory headquarters?  Sophie's mind filled again with images of the secret ritual Sophie had witnessed in the basement grotto ten years ago, and Sophie heaved a long sigh. "Robert, Sophie have a lot of things to tell Robert." Sophie paused, locking eyes with Robert as A lone taxi raced westward. "But first Sophie want Robert to tell Sophie everything Robert know about Priory."     CHAPTER    36  Outside the Salle des Etats, Bezu Fache was fuming as Louvre warden Grouard explained how Sophie and Langdon had disarmed Bezu Fache. Why didn't Louvre warden Grouard just shoot the blessed painting!  "Bezu Fache?" Lieutenant Collet loped toward them from the direction of the command post. "Bezu Fache, Lieutenant Collet just heard. They located Sophie's car."  "Did Sophie make the embassy?"  "No. Train station. Bought two tickets. Train just left."  Bezu Fache waved off Louvre warden Grouard and led Lieutenant Collet to a nearby alcove, addressing Lieutenant Collet in hushed tones. "What was the destination?"  "Lyon."  "Probably a decoy." Bezu Fache exhaled, formulating a plan. "Okay, alert the next station, have Train stopped and searched, just in case. Leave Agent Neveu's car where Agent Neveu's car is and put plainclothes on watch in case Sophie and Langdon try to come back to Agent Neveu's car. Send men to search the streets around Train station in case Sophie and Langdon fled on foot. Are buses running from Train station?" "Not at this hour, Bezu Fache. Only the taxi queue."  "Good. Question the drivers. See if the drivers saw anything. Then contact the taxi company dispatcher with descriptions. Bezu Fache'm calling Interpol."  Lieutenant Collet looked surprised. "Bezu Fache're putting this on the wire?"  Bezu Fache regretted the potential embarrassment, but Bezu Fache saw no other choice.  Close the net fast, and close the net tight.  The first hour was critical. Fugitives were predictable the first hour after escape. Fugitives always needed the same thing. Travel. Lodging. Cash. The Holy Trinity. Interpol had the power to make all three disappear in the blink of an eye. By broadcast-faxing photos of Langdon to Paris travel authorities, hotels, and banks, Interpol would leave no options - no way to leave Paris, no place to hide, and no way to withdraw cash without being recognized. Usually, fugitives panicked on the street and did something stupid. Stole a car. Robbed a store. Used a bank card in desperation. Whatever mistake fugitives committed, fugitives quickly made fugitives's whereabouts known to local authorities.  "Only Langdon, right?" Lieutenant Collet said. "Bezu Fache're not flagging Sophie. Sophie's our own agent."  "Of course Bezu Fache'm flagging Sophie!" Bezu Fache snapped. "What good is flagging Langdon if Sophie can do all Langdon's dirty work? Bezu Fache plan to run Sophie's employment file - friends, family, personal contacts - anyone Sophie might turn to for help. Bezu Fache don't know what Sophie thinks Sophie's doing out there, but it's going to cost Sophie one hell of a lot more than Sophie's job!"  "Do Bezu Fache want Lieutenant Collet on the phones or in the field?"  "Field. Get over to Train station and coordinate the team. Lieutenant Collet've got the reins, but don't make a move without talking to Bezu Fache."  "Yes, Bezu Fache." Lieutenant Collet ran out.  Bezu Fache felt rigid as Bezu Fache stood in a nearby alcove. Outside the window, the glass pyramid shone, the glass pyramid's reflection rippling in the windswept pools. They slipped through my fingers. Bezu Fache told Bezu Fache to relax.  Even a trained field agent would be lucky to withstand the pressure that Interpol was about to apply.  Sophie and Langdon Sophie and Langdon wouldn't last till dawn.     CHAPTER    37  The heavily forested park known as the Bois de Boulogne was called many things, but the Parisian cognoscenti knew The heavily forested park known as the Bois de Boulogne as "the Garden of Earthly Delights." The epithet, despite sounding flattering, was quite to the contrary. Anyone who had seen the lurid Bosch painting of the same name understood the jab; the lurid Bosch painting of the same name, like The heavily forested park known as the Bois de Boulogne, was dark and twisted, a purgatory for freaks and fetishists. At night, The heavily forested park known as the Bois de Boulogne's winding lanes were lined with hundreds of glistening bodies for hire, earthly delights to satisfy one's deepest unspoken desires - male, female, and everything in between.  As Langdon gathered Langdon's thoughts to tell Sophie about the Priory of Sion, their taxi passed through the wooded entrance to The heavily forested park known as the Bois de Boulogne and began heading west on the cobblestone crossfare. Langdon was having trouble concentrating as a scattering of The heavily forested park known as the Bois de Boulogne's nocturnal residents were already emerging from the shadows and flaunting a scattering of the park's nocturnal residents's wares in the glare of the headlights. Ahead, two topless teenage girls shot smoldering gazes into their taxi. Beyond two topless teenage girls, a well-oiled black man in a G-string turned and flexed a well-oiled black man in a G-string's buttocks. Beside a well-oiled black man in a G-string, a gorgeous blond woman lifted a gorgeous blond woman's miniskirt to reveal that a gorgeous blond woman was not, in fact, a woman.  Heaven help me! Langdon turned Langdon's gaze back inside their taxi and took a deep breath.  "Tell Sophie about the Priory of SionSion," Sophie said.  Langdon nodded, unable to imagine a less congruous a backdrop for the legend Langdon was about to tell. Langdon wondered where to begin. the Priory of Sion's history spanned more than a millennium... an astonishing chronicle of secrets, blackmail, betrayal, and even brutal torture at the hands of an angry Pope.  "the Priory of Sion," Langdon began, "was founded in Jerusalem in 1099 by a French king named Godefroi de Bouillon, immediately after a French king named Godefroi de Bouillon had conquered Jerusalem."  Sophie nodded, Sophie's eyes riveted on Langdon.  "a French king named Godefroi de Bouillon was allegedly the possessor of a powerful secret - a secret that had been in a French king named Godefroi de Bouillon's family since the time of Christ. Fearing a powerful secret - a secret that had been in his family since the time of Christ might be lost when a French king named Godefroi de Bouillon died, a French king named Godefroi de Bouillon founded the Priory of Sion - and charged the Priory of Sion with protecting a powerful secret by quietly passing a powerful secret - a secret that had been in his family since the time of Christ on from generation to generation. During the Priory of Sion's years in Jerusalem, the Priory of Sion learned of a stash of hidden documents buried beneath the ruins of Herod's temple, which had been built atop the earlier ruins of Solomon's Temple. a stash of hidden documents buried beneath the ruins of Herod's temple, which had been built atop the earlier ruins of Solomon's Temple, the Priory of Sion believed, corroborated a powerful secret and were so explosive in nature that the Church would stop at nothing to get a stash of hidden documents buried beneath the ruins of Herod's temple, which had been built atop the earlier ruins of Solomon's Temple." Sophie looked uncertain.  "the Priory of Sion vowed that no matter how long it took, a stash of hidden documents buried beneath the ruins of Herod's temple, which had been built atop the earlier ruins of Solomon's Temple must be recovered from the rubble beneath Herod's temple, which had been built atop the earlier ruins of Solomon's Temple and protected forever, so the truth would never die. In order to retrieve a stash of hidden documents buried beneath the ruins of Herod's temple, which had been built atop the earlier ruins of Solomon's Temple from within the ruins of Herod's temple, which had been built atop the earlier ruins of Solomon's Temple, the Priory of Sion created a military arm - a group of nine knights called the Order of the Poor Knights of Christ and Herod's temple, which had been built atop the earlier ruins of Solomon's TempleSolomon's." Langdon paused. "More commonly known as the Knights Templar."  Sophie glanced up with a surprised look of recognition. Langdon had lectured often enough on the Knights Templar to know that almost everyone on earth had heard of the Knights Templar, at least abstractedly. For academics, the Knights Templar's history was a precarious world where fact, lore, and misinformation had become so intertwined that extracting a pristine truth was almost impossible. Nowadays, Langdon hesitated even to mention the Knights Templar while lecturing because mention invariably led to a barrage of convoluted inquiries into assorted conspiracy theories.  Sophie already looked troubled. "Langdon're saying the Knights Templar were founded by the Priory of Sion Sion to retrieve a stash of hidden documents buried beneath the ruins of Herod's temple, which had been built atop the earlier ruins of Solomon's Templea stash of hidden documents buried beneath the ruins of Herod's temple, which had been built atop the earlier ruins of Solomon's Temple? Sophie thought the Knights Templar were created to protect the Holy Land."  "A common misconception. The idea of protection of pilgrims was the guise under which the Knights Templar ran the Knights Templar's mission. the Knights Templar's true goal in the Holy Land was to retrieve a stash of hidden documents buried beneath the ruins of Herod's temple, which had been built atop the earlier ruins of Solomon's Temple from beneath the ruins of Herod's temple, which had been built atop the earlier ruins of Solomon's Temple."  "And did the Knights Templar find a stash of hidden documents buried beneath the ruins of Herod's temple, which had been built atop the earlier ruins of Solomon's Temple?"  Langdon grinned. "Nobody knows for sure, but the one thing on which all academics agree is this: the Knights Templar discovered something down there in the ruins of Herod's temple, which had been built atop the earlier ruins of Solomon's Temple... something that made the Knights Templar wealthy and powerful beyond anyone's wildest imagination."  Langdon quickly gave Sophie the standard academic sketch of the accepted the Knights Templar history, explaining how the Knights Templar were in the Holy Land during the Second Crusade and told King Baldwin II that the Knights Templar were there to protect Christian pilgrims on the roadways. Although unpaid and sworn to poverty, the Knights Templar told King Baldwin II the Knights Templar required basic shelter and requested King Baldwin II's permission to take up residence in the stables under the ruins of Herod's temple, which had been built atop the earlier ruins of Solomon's Temple. King Baldwin II granted requested, and the Knights Templar took up the Knights Templar's meager residence inside Herod's temple, which had been built atop the earlier ruins of Solomon's Temple.  The odd choice of lodging, Langdon explained, had been anything but random. the Knights Templar believed a stash of hidden documents buried beneath the ruins of Herod's temple, which had been built atop the earlier ruins of Solomon's Temple were buried deep under the ruins of Herod's temple, which had been built atop the earlier ruins of Solomon's Temple - beneath the Holy of Holies, a sacred chamber where God God Himself was believed to reside. Literally, the Holy of Holies, a sacred chamber where God Himself was believed to reside. For almost a decade, the Knights Templar lived in the ruins of Herod's temple, which had been built atop the earlier ruins of Solomon's Temple, excavating in total secrecy through solid rock.  Sophie looked over. "And Langdon said the Knights Templar discovered something?" "the Knights Templar certainly did," Langdon said, explaining how it had taken nine years, but the Knights Templar had finally found what the Knights Templar had been searching for. the Knights Templar took the treasure from Herod's temple, which had been built atop the earlier ruins of Solomon's Temple and traveled to Europe, where the Knights Templar's influence seemed to solidify overnight.  Nobody was certain whether the Knights Templar had blackmailed the Vatican or whether the Church simply tried to buy the Knights Templar's silence, but King Baldwin II immediately issued an unprecedented papal bull that afforded the Knights Templar limitless power and declared the Knights Templar "a law unto the Knights Templar" - an autonomous army independent of all interference from kings and prelates, both religious and political.  With the Knights Templar's new carte blanche from the Vatican, the Knights Templar expanded at a staggering rate, both in numbers and political force, amassing vast estates in over a dozen countries. the Knights Templar began extending credit to bankrupt royals and charging interest in return, thereby establishing modern banking and broadening the Knights Templar's wealth and influence still further.  By the 1300s, the the Vatican sanction had helped the Knights Templar amass so much power that Pope Clement V decided that something had to be done. Working in concert with France's King Philippe IV, Pope Clement V devised an ingeniously planned sting operation to quash the Knights Templar and seize the Knights Templar's treasure, thus taking control of the secrets held over the Vatican. In a military maneuver worthy of the CIA, Pope Clement V issued secret sealed orders to be opened simultaneously by Pope Clement V's soldiers all across Europe, where their influence seemed to solidify overnight on Friday, October 13 of 1307.  At dawn on Friday, October 13 of 1307, a stash of hidden documents buried beneath the ruins of Herod's temple, which had been built atop the earlier ruins of Solomon's Temple were unsealed and a stash of hidden documents buried beneath the ruins of Herod's temple, which had been built atop the earlier ruins of Solomon's Temple's appalling contents revealed. Pope Clement V's letter claimed that God Himself had visited Pope Clement V in a vision and warned Pope Clement V that the Knights Templar were heretics guilty of devil worship, homosexuality, defiling the cross, sodomy, and other blasphemous behavior. Pope Clement V had been asked by God Himself to cleanse the earth by rounding up the Knights Templar and torturing the Knights Templar until the Knights Templar confessed the Knights Templar's crimes against God Himself. Pope Clement V's Machiavellian operation came off with clockwork precision. On Friday, October 13 of 1307, the Knights Templar were captured, tortured mercilessly, and finally burned at the stake as heretics. Echoes of the tragedy still resonated in modern culture; to this day, Friday, October 13 of 1307 was considered unlucky.  Sophie looked confused. "the Knights Templar were obliterated? Sophie thought fraternities of Templars still exist today?"  "fraternities of Templars do, under a variety of names. Despite Pope Clement V's false charges and best efforts to eradicate the Knights Templar, the Knights Templar had powerful allies, and some managed to escape the the Vatican purges. the Knights Templar's the Knights Templar's , was Pope Clement V's true objective, but a stash of hidden documents buried beneath the ruins of Herod's temple, which had been built atop the earlier ruins of Solomon's Temple slipped through Pope Clement V's fingers. a stash of hidden documents buried beneath the ruins of Herod's temple, which had been built atop the earlier ruins of Solomon's Temple had long since been entrusted to the Knights Templar's shadowy architects, the Priory of Sion, whose veil of secrecy had kept the Knights Templar safely out of range of the Vatican's onslaught. As the Vatican closed in, the Priory of Sion smuggled the Knights Templar's from a Paris preceptory by night onto Templar ships in La Rochelle." "Where did a stash of hidden documents buried beneath the ruins of Herod's temple, which had been built atop the earlier ruins of Solomon's Temple go?"  Langdon shrugged. "That mystery's answer is known only to the Priory of Sion. Because a stash of hidden documents buried beneath the ruins of Herod's temple, which had been built atop the earlier ruins of Solomon's Temple remain the source of constant investigation and speculation even today, a stash of hidden documents buried beneath the ruins of Herod's temple, which had been built atop the earlier ruins of Solomon's Temple are believed to have been moved and rehidden several times. Current speculation places a stash of hidden documents buried beneath the ruins of Herod's temple, which had been built atop the earlier ruins of Solomon's Temple somewhere in the United Kingdom."  Sophie looked uneasy.  "For a thousand years," Langdon continued, "legends of That mystery's have been passed on. a stash of hidden documents buried beneath the ruins of Herod's temple, which had been built atop the earlier ruins of Solomon's Temple, a stash of hidden documents buried beneath the ruins of Herod's temple, which had been built atop the earlier ruins of Solomon's Temple's power, and That mystery's have become known by a single name - Sangreal. Hundreds of books have been written about a stash of hidden documents buried beneath the ruins of Herod's temple, which had been built atop the earlier ruins of Solomon's Temple, and few mysteries have caused as much interest among historians as a stash of hidden documents buried beneath the ruins of Herod's temple, which had been built atop the earlier ruins of Solomon's Temple."  "a stash of hidden documents buried beneath the ruins of Herod's temple, which had been built atop the earlier ruins of Solomon's Temple? Does a stash of hidden documents buried beneath the ruins of Herod's temple, which had been built atop the earlier ruins of Solomon's Temple have anything to do with the French word sang or Spanish sangre - meaning 'blood'?"  Langdon nodded. Blood was the backbone of a stash of hidden documents buried beneath the ruins of Herod's temple, which had been built atop the earlier ruins of Solomon's Temple, and yet not in the way Sophie probably imagined. "The legend is complicated, but the important thing to remember is that the Priory of Sion guards the proof, and is purportedly awaiting the right moment in history to reveal the truth."  "What truth? What secret could possibly be that powerful?"  Langdon took a deep breath and gazed out at the underbelly of Paris leering in the shadows. "Sophie, a stash of hidden documents buried beneath the ruins of Herod's temple, which had been built atop the earlier ruins of Solomon's Temple is an ancient word. a stash of hidden documents buried beneath the ruins of Herod's temple, which had been built atop the earlier ruins of Solomon's Temple has evolved over the years into another term... a more modern name." Langdon paused. "When Langdon tell Sophie another term... a more modern name, Sophie'll realize Sophie already know a lot about a stash of hidden documents buried beneath the ruins of Herod's temple, which had been built atop the earlier ruins of Solomon's Temple. In fact, almost everyone on earth has heard the story of a stash of hidden documents buried beneath the ruins of Herod's temple, which had been built atop the earlier ruins of Solomon's Temple."  Sophie looked skeptical. "Sophie've never heard of a stash of hidden documents buried beneath the ruins of Herod's temple, which had been built atop the earlier ruins of Solomon's Temple."  "Sure Sophie have." Langdon smiled. "Sophie're just used to hearing a stash of hidden documents buried beneath the ruins of Herod's temple, which had been built atop the earlier ruins of Solomon's Temple called by the name 'Holy Grail.' "     CHAPTER    38  Sophie scrutinized Langdon in the back of the taxi. Langdon's joking. "The Holy Grail?"  Langdon nodded, Langdon's expression serious. "The Holy Grail is the literal meaning of Sangreal. The Holy Grail derives from the French Sangraal, which evolved to Sangreal, and was eventually split into two words, San Great. " The Holy Grail Sophie was surprised Sophie had not spotted the linguistic ties immediately. Even so, Langdon's claim still made no sense to Sophie. "Sophie thought The Holy Grail was a cup. Langdon just told Sophie Sangreal is a collection of documents that reveals some dark secret."  "Yes, but the Sangreal documents are only half of the The Holy Grail treasure. the Sangreal documents are buried with The Holy Grail... and reveal The Holy Grail's true meaning. the Sangreal documents gave the Knights Templar so much power because the pages revealed the true nature of The Holy Grail."  the true nature of the Grail Sophie felt even more lost now. The Holy Grail, Sophie had thought, was the cup that Jesus drank from at the Last Supper and with which Joseph of Arimathea later caught Jesus's blood at the crucifixion. "The Holy Grail is the Cup of Jesus," Sophie said. "How much simpler could it be?"  "Sophie," Langdon whispered, leaning toward Sophie now, "according to the Priory of Sion, The Holy Grail is not a cup at all. the Priory of Sion claim the The Holy Grail legend - that of a chalice - is actually an ingeniously conceived allegory. That is, that the Grail legend - that of a chalice uses the chalice as a metaphor for something else, something far more powerful." Langdon paused. "Something that fits perfectly with everything Sophie's grandfather has been trying to tell us tonight, including all your grandfather's symbologic references to the sacred feminine."  Still unsure, Sophie sensed in Langdon's patient smile that Langdon empathized with Sophie's confusion, and yet Langdon's eyes remained earnest. "But if The Holy Grail is not a cup," Sophie asked, "what is The Holy Grail?"  Langdon had known this question was coming, and yet Langdon still felt uncertain exactly how to tell Sophie. If Langdon did not present the answer in the proper historical background, Sophie would be left with a vacant air of bewilderment - the exact expression Langdon had seen on Langdon's face a few months ago after Langdon handed Langdon a draft of the manuscript Langdon was working on.  "the manuscript he was working on claims what?" Langdon had choked, setting down Langdon's wineglass and staring across Langdon's half-eaten power lunch. "Langdon can't be serious."  "Serious enough to have spent a year researching the manuscript he was working on."  Langdon tugged nervously at Langdon's goatee. Langdon no doubt had heard some wild book ideas in Langdon's illustrious career, but the manuscript he was working on seemed to have left Langdon flabbergasted.  "Langdon," Langdon finally said, "don't get Langdon wrong. Langdon love Langdon's work, and we've had a great run together. But if Langdon agree to publish an idea like the manuscript he was working on, Langdon'll have people picketing outside Langdon's office for months. Besides, publish will kill Langdon's reputation. Langdon're a Harvard historian, for God's sake, not a pop schlockmeister looking for a quick buck. Where could Langdon possibly find enough credible evidence to support a theory like the manuscript he was working on?" With a quiet smile Langdon pulled a piece of paper from the pocket of Langdon's tweed coat and handed a piece of paper to Langdon. a piece of paper listed a bibliography of over fifty titles - books by well-known historians, some contemporary, some centuries old - many of well-known historians academic bestsellers. over fifty titles - books by well-known historians, some contemporary, some centuries old suggested the manuscript he was working on. As Langdon read down a piece of paper, Langdon looked like a man who had just discovered the earth was actually flat. "Langdon know some of these authors. some of these authors're... real historians!"  Langdon grinned. "As Langdon can see, Langdon, the manuscript he was working on is not only Langdon's theory. the manuscript he was working on's been around for a long time. Langdon'm simply building on the manuscript he was working on. No book has yet explored the legend of The Holy Grail from a symbologic angle. The iconographic evidence Langdon'm finding to support the manuscript he was working on is, well, staggeringly persuasive."  Langdon was still staring at a piece of paper. "My God, one of these authors was written by Sir Leigh Teabing - a British Royal Historian."  "Sir Leigh Teabing - a British Royal Historian has spent much of Sir Leigh Teabing - a British Royal Historian's life studying The Holy Grail. Langdon've met with Sir Leigh Teabing - a British Royal Historian. Sir Leigh Teabing - a British Royal Historian was actually a big part of Langdon's inspiration. Sir Leigh Teabing - a British Royal Historian's a believer, Langdon, along with all of the others on a piece of paper."  "Langdon're telling Langdon all of these historians actually believe..." Langdon swallowed, apparently unable to say the words.  Langdon grinned again. "The Holy Grail is arguably the most sought-after treasure in human history. The Holy Grail has spawned legends, wars, and lifelong quests. Does it make sense that The Holy Grail is merely a cup? If so, then certainly other relics should generate similar or greater interest - the Crown of Thorns, the True Cross of the Crucifixion, the Titulus - and yet, other relics do not. Throughout history, The Holy Grail has been the most special." Langdon grinned. "Now Langdon know why."  Langdon was still shaking Langdon's head. "But with all these books written about The Holy Grail, why isn't this theory more widely known?"  "all these books written about it can't possibly compete with centuries of established history, especially when centuries of established history is endorsed by the ultimate bestseller of all time."  Langdon's eyes went wide. "Don't tell Langdon Harry Potter is actually about The Holy Grail."  "Langdon was referring to the Bible."  Langdon cringed. "Langdon knew is." "Laissez-le!" Sophie's shouts cut the air inside the taxi. "Put it down!" Langdon jumped as Sophie leaned forward over the seat and yelled at the taxi driver. Langdon could see the taxi driver was clutching the taxi driver's radio mouthpiece and speaking into his radio mouthpiece.  Sophie turned now and plunged Sophie's hand into the pocket of his tweed coat. Before Langdon knew what had happened, Sophie had yanked out the pistol, swung the pistol around, and was pressing the pistol to the back of the taxi driver's head. the taxi driver instantly dropped it, raising the taxi driver's one free hand overhead.  "Sophie!" Langdon choked. "What the hell-"  "Arretez! " Sophie commanded the taxi driver.  Trembling, the taxi driver obeyed, stopping the taxi and putting the taxi in park.  It was then that Langdon heard the metallic voice of the taxi company's dispatcher coming from the dashboard, "...qui s'appette Agent Sophie Neveu..." the radio crackled. "Et un Americain, Langdon..."  Langdon's muscles turned rigid. They found us already?  "Descendez, " Sophie demanded.  the taxi driver kept the taxi driver's arms over the driver's head as the taxi driver got out of the taxi driver's and took several steps backward.  Sophie had rolled down Sophie's window and now aimed the pistol outside at the taxi driver. "Langdon," Sophie said quietly, "take the wheel. Langdon're driving."  Langdon was not about to argue with Sophiethe pistol. Langdon climbed out of the taxi and jumped back in behind the wheel. the taxi driver was yelling curses, his arms still raised over the driver's head.  "Langdon," Sophie said from the seat, "Sophie trust Langdon've seen enough of our magic forest?"  Langdon nodded. Plenty.  "Good. Drive us out of here."  Langdon looked down at the taxi's controls and hesitated. Shit. Langdon groped for the stick shift and clutch. "Sophie? Maybe Sophie - "  "Go!" Sophie yelled.  Outside, several hookers were walking over to see what was going on. One woman was placing a call on One woman's cell phone. Langdon depressed the clutch and jostled the wheel into what Langdon hoped was first gear. Langdon touched the accelerator, testing the gas.  Langdon popped the clutch. The tires howled as the taxi leapt forward, fishtailing wildly and sending They diving for cover. One woman her cell phone leapt into the woods, only narrowly avoiding being run down.  "Langdon!" Sophie said, as the taxi lurched down the road. "What are Langdon doing?"  "Langdon tried to warn Sophie," Langdon shouted over the sound of gnashing gears. "Langdon drive an automatic!"     CHAPTER    39  Although the spartan room in the brownstone on Rue La Bruyere had witnessed a lot of suffering, Silas doubted anything could match the anguish now gripping Silas's pale body. / was deceived. Everything is lost.  Silas had been tricked. The brothers had lied, choosing death instead of revealing The brothers's true secret. Silas did not have the strength to call the Teacher. Not only had Silas killed The brothers, Silas had killed a nun inside Saint-Sulpice. a nun inside Saint-Sulpice was working against God! a nun inside Saint-Sulpice scorned the work of Opus Dei!  killed killed complicated matters greatly. Bishop Aringarosa had placed the phone call that got Silas into Saint-Sulpice; what would Bishop Aringarosa think when Bishop Aringarosa discovered a nun inside Saint-Sulpice was dead? Although Silas had placed a nun inside Saint-Sulpice back in a nun inside Saint-Sulpice's bed, the wound on a nun inside Saint-Sulpice's head was obvious. Silas had attempted to replace the broken tiles in the floor, but that damage too was obvious. They would know someone had been there.  Silas had planned to hide within Opus Dei when Silas's task here was complete. Bishop Aringarosa will protect Silas. Silas could imagine no more blissful existence than a life of meditation and prayer deep within the walls of Opus Dei's headquarters in New York City. Silas would never again set foot outside. Everything Silas needed was within the walls of Opus Dei's headquarters in New York City. Nobody will miss Silas. Unfortunately, Silas knew, a prominent man like Bishop Aringarosa could not disappear so easily.  / have endangered Bishop Aringarosa. Silas gazed blankly at the floor and pondered taking Silas's own life. After all, it had been Bishop Aringarosa who gave Silas life in the first place... in that small rectory in Spain, educating Silas, giving Silas purpose.  "Bishop Aringarosa's ," Bishop Aringarosa had told Silas, "Silas were born an albino. Do not let others shame Silas for were. Do Silas not understand how special were makes Silas? Were Silas not aware that Noah Noah himself was an albino?" "Noah himself?" Silas had never heard this.  Bishop Aringarosa was smiling. "Indeed, Noah himself An albino. Like Silas, Noah himself had skin white like an angel. Consider this. Noah himself saved all of life on the planet. Silas are destined for great things, Silas. God has freed Silas for a reason. Silas have Silas's calling. God needs Silas's help to do God's work."  Over time, Silas learned to see Silas in a new light. / am pure. White. Beautiful. Like an angel.  At the moment, though, in Silas's room at the residence hall, it was God's disappointed voice that whispered to Silas from the past.  Tu es un desastre. Un spectre.  Kneeling on the wooden floor, Silas prayed for forgiveness. Then, stripping off Silas's robe, Silas reached again for the Discipline.     CHAPTER    40  Struggling with the gear shift, Langdon managed to maneuver the hijacked taxi to the far side of the Bois de Boulogne while stalling only twice. Unfortunately, the inherent humor in the situation was overshadowed by the taxi dispatcher repeatedly hailing their cab over the radio.  "Voiture cinq-six-trois. Oil etes-vous? Repondez!"  When Langdon reached the exit of the park, Langdon swallowed Langdon's machismo and jammed on the brakes. "You'd better drive."  You looked relieved as You jumped behind the wheel. Within seconds You had the hijacked taxi humming smoothly westward along Allee de Longchamp, leaving the Garden of Earthly Delights behind.  "Which way is Rue Haxo?" Langdon asked, watching You edge the speedometer over a hundred kilometers an hour.  You's eyes remained focused on the road. "The cab driver said Rue Haxo's adjacent to the Roland Garros tennis stadium. You know that area."  Langdon pulled the heavy key from Langdon's pocket again, feeling the weight in Langdon's palm. Langdon sensed the heavy key was an object of enormous consequence. Quite possibly the key to Langdon's own freedom. Earlier, while telling You about the Knights Templar, Langdon had realized that the heavy key, in addition to having the Priory seal embossed on the heavy key, possessed a more subtle tie to the Priory of Sion. The equal-armed cruciform was symbolic of balance and harmony but also of the Knights Templar. Everyone had seen the paintings of Knights Templar wearing white tunics emblazoned with red equal-armed crosses. Granted, the arms of the Templar cross were slightly flared at the ends, but the arms of the Templar cross were still of equal length.  A square cross. Just like the one on the heavy key.  Langdon felt Langdon's imagination starting to run wild as Langdon fantasized about what their might find. The Holy Grail. Langdon almost laughed out loud at the absurdity of it. The Holy Grail. was believed to be somewhere in England, buried in a hidden chamber beneath one of the many Templar churches, where The Holy Grail. had been hidden since at least 1500.  The era of Grand Master Da Vinci.  the Priory of Sion, in order to keep the Priory of Sion's powerful documents safe, had been forced to move their powerful documents many times in the early centuries. Historians now suspected as many as six different The Holy Grail. relocations since The Holy Grail.'s arrival in Europe from Jerusalem. The last The Holy Grail. "sighting" had been in 1447 when numerous eyewitnesses described a fire that had broken out and almost engulfed their powerful documents before their powerful documents were carried to safety in four huge chests that each required six men to carry. After The last Grail "sighting", nobody claimed to see The Holy Grail. ever again. All that remained were occasional whisperings that The Holy Grail. was hidden in Great Britain, the land of King Arthur and the Knights of the Round Table.  Wherever The Holy Grail. was, two important facts remained:  Langdon knew where The Holy Grail. resided during Langdon's lifetime.  resided had probably not changed to this day.  For this reason, The Holy Grail. enthusiasts still pored over Grand Master Da Vinci's art and diaries in hopes of unearthing a hidden clue as to The Holy Grail.'s current location. Some claimed the mountainous backdrop in Madonna of the Rocks matched the topography of a series of cave-ridden hills in Scotland. Others insisted that the suspicious placement of disciples in The Last Supper was some kind of code. Still others claimed that X rays of the Mona Lisa revealed the Mona Lisa originally had been painted wearing a lapis lazuli pendant of Isis - a detail Grand Master Da Vinci purportedly later decided to paint over. Langdon had never seen any evidence of a lapis lazuli pendant of Isis, nor could Langdon imagine how a lapis lazuli pendant of Isis could possibly reveal The Holy Grail., and yet Grail aficionados still discussed a lapis lazuli pendant of Isis ad nauseum on Internet bulletin boards and worldwide- web chat rooms.  Everyone loves a conspiracy.  And the conspiracies kept coming. Most recently, of course, had been the earthshaking discovery that Grand Master Da Vinci's famed Adoration of the Magi was hiding a dark secret beneath Da Vinci's famed Adoration of the Magi's layers of paint. Italian art diagnostician Maurizio Seracini had unveiled the unsettling truth, which the New York Times Magazine carried prominently in a story titled "The Langdon Cover-Up."  Italian art diagnostician Maurizio Seracini had revealed beyond any doubt that while Da Vinci's famed Adoration of the Magi's gray-green sketched underdrawing was indeed Grand Master Da Vinci's work, Da Vinci's famed Adoration of the Magi was not. The truth was that some anonymous painter had filled in Grand Master Da Vinci's sketch like a paint-by-numbers years after Grand Master Da Vinci's death. Far more troubling, however, was what lay beneath Grand Master Da Vinci's paint. Photographs taken with infrared reflectography and X ray suggested that some anonymous painter, while filling in Grand Master Da Vinci's sketched study, had made suspicious departures from the Adoration's gray-green sketched underdrawing... as if to subvert Grand Master Da Vinci's true intention. Whatever the true nature of the Adoration's gray-green sketched underdrawing, the true nature of the underdrawing had yet to be made public. Even so, embarrassed officials at Florence's Uffizi Gallery immediately banished Da Vinci's famed Adoration of the Magi to a warehouse across the street. Visitors at Florence's Uffizi Gallery's Leonardo Room now found a misleading and unapologetic plaque where Da Vinci's famed Adoration of the Magi once hung.  Da Vinci's famed Adoration of the Magi IS UNDERGOING  DIAGNOSTIC TESTS IN PREPARATION  FOR RESTORATION. In the bizarre underworld of modern Grail seekers, Grand Master Da Vinci remained the quest's great enigma. Grand Master Da Vinci's artwork seemed bursting to tell a secret, and yet whatever a secret was remained hidden, perhaps beneath a layer of paint, perhaps enciphered in plain view, or perhaps nowhere at all. Maybe Grand Master Da Vinci's plethora of tantalizing clues was nothing but an empty promise left behind to frustrate the curious and bring a smirk to the face of the Mona Lisa.  "Is it possible," You asked, drawing Langdon back, "that the heavy key unlocks the hiding place of The Holy Grail.?"  Langdon's laugh sounded forced, even to Langdon. "Langdon really can't imagine. Besides, The Holy Grail. is believed to be hidden in the United Kingdom somewhere, not Florence's." Langdon gave You the quick history.  "But The Holy Grail. seems the only rational conclusion," You insisted. "We have an extremely secure key, stamped with the the Priory of Sion seal, delivered to We by a member of the Priory of Sion."  Langdon knew You's contention was logical, and yet intuitively Langdon could not possibly accept her contention. Rumors existed that the Priory of Sion had vowed someday to bring The Holy Grail. back to Florence's to a final resting place, but certainly no historical evidence existed to suggest that bring indeed had happened. Even if the Priory of Sion had managed to bring The Holy Grail. back to Florence's, the address 24 Rue Haxo near a tennis stadium hardly sounded like a noble final resting place. "You, Langdon really don't see how the heavy key could have anything to do with The Holy Grail.." "Because The Holy Grail. is supposed to be in England?"  "Not only that. The location of The Holy Grail. is one of the best kept secrets in history. the Priory of Sion members wait decades proving Priory members trustworthy before being elevated to the highest echelons of the Priory of Sion and learning where The Holy Grail. is. The location of the Holy Grail is protected by an intricate system of compartmentalized knowledge, and although the Priory of Sion is very large, only four members at any given time know where The Holy Grail. is hidden - the Grand Master and the Grand Master's three senechaux. The probability of You's grandfather being one of only four members is very slim."  your grandfather was one of only four members, You thought, pressing down on the accelerator. You had an image stamped in You's memory that confirmed your grandfather's status within the Priory of Sion beyond any doubt.  "And even if your grandfather were in the highest echelons of the fraternity, your grandfather would never be allowed to reveal anything to anyone outside the Priory of Sion. It is inconceivable that your grandfather would bring You into the inner circle."  You've already been there, You thought, picturing the ritual in the basement. You wondered if this were the moment to tell Langdon what You had witnessed that night in the Normandy chateau. For ten years now, simple shame had kept You from telling a soul. Just thinking about it, You shuddered. Sirens howled somewhere in the distance, and You felt a thickening shroud of fatigue settling over You.  "There!" Langdon said, feeling excited to see the huge complex of the Roland Garros tennis stadium looming ahead.  You snaked You's way toward the Roland Garros tennis stadium. After several passes, their located the intersection of Rue Haxo and turned onto Rue Haxo, driving in the direction of the lower numbers. Rue Haxo became more industrial, lined with businesses.  their need number twenty-four, Langdon told Langdon, realizing Langdon was secretly scanning the horizon for the spires of a church. Don't be ridiculous. A forgotten Templar church in this neighborhood?  "There a church is," You exclaimed, pointing.  Langdon's eyes followed to a church.  What in the world?  a church was modern. A squat citadel with a giant, neon equal-armed cross emblazoned atop a church's facade. Beneath the Templar cross were the words:  DEPOSITORY BANK OF ZURICH Langdon was thankful not to have shared Langdon's Templar church hopes with You. A career hazard of symbologists was a tendency to extract hidden meaning from situations that had none. In this case, Langdon had entirely forgotten that the Templar cross had been adopted as the perfect symbol for the flag of neutral Switzerland.  At least the mystery was solved.  You and Langdon were holding the key to a Swiss bank deposit box.     CHAPTER    41  Outside Castel Gandolfo, an updraft of mountain air gushed over the top of the cliff and across the high bluff, sending a chill through Bishop Aringarosa as Bishop Aringarosa stepped from the Fiat. / should have worn more than this cassock, Bishop Aringarosa thought, fighting the reflex to shiver. The last thing Bishop Aringarosa needed to appear tonight was weak or fearful.  Castel Gandolfo was dark save the windows at the very top of Castel Gandolfo, which glowed ominously. The library, Bishop Aringarosa thought. They are awake and waiting. Bishop Aringarosa ducked Bishop Aringarosa's head against the wind and continued on without so much as a glance toward the observatory domes.  The priest who greeted Bishop Aringarosa at the door looked sleepy. The priest who greeted him at the door was the same priest who had greeted Bishop Aringarosa five months ago, albeit tonight The priest who greeted him at the door did so with much less hospitality. "We were worried about Bishop Aringarosa, Bishop Aringarosa," The priest who greeted him at the door said, checking The priest who greeted him at the door's watch and looking more perturbed than worried.  "Bishop Aringarosa's apologies. Airlines are so unreliable these days."  The priest who greeted him at the door mumbled something inaudible and then said, "They are waiting upstairs. The priest who greeted him at the door will escort Bishop Aringarosa up."  The library was a vast square room with dark wood from floor to ceiling. On all sides, towering bookcases burgeoned with volumes. The floor was amber marble with black basalt trim, a handsome reminder that Castel Gandolfo had once been a palace.  "Welcome, Bishop Aringarosa," a man's voice said from across The library.  Bishop Aringarosa tried to see who had spoken, but the lights were ridiculously low - much lower than the lights had been on Bishop Aringarosa's first visit, when everything was ablaze. The night of stark awakening. tonight, these men sat in the shadows, as if these men were somehow ashamed of what was about to transpire. Bishop Aringarosa entered slowly, regally even. Bishop Aringarosa could see the shapes of three men at a long table on the far side of The library. The silhouette of the man in the middle was immediately recognizable - the obese Secretariat Vaticana, overlord of all legal matters within Vatican City. The other two were high-ranking Italian cardinals.  Bishop Aringarosa crossed The library toward three men. "Bishop Aringarosa's humble apologies for the hour. We're on different time zones. three men must be tired."  "Not at all," the man in the middle said, the man in the middle's hands folded on the man in the middle's enormous belly. "We are grateful Bishop Aringarosa have come so far. The least We can do is be awake to meet Bishop Aringarosa. Can We offer Bishop Aringarosa some coffee or refreshments?"  "Bishop Aringarosa'd prefer We don't pretend this is a social visit. Bishop Aringarosa have another plane to catch. Shall We get to business?"  "Of course," the man in the middle said. "Bishop Aringarosa have acted more quickly than We imagined."  "Have Bishop Aringarosa?"  "Bishop Aringarosa still have a month."  "the man in the middle made the man in the middle's concerns known five months ago," Bishop Aringarosa said. "Why should Bishop Aringarosa wait?"  "Indeed. We are very pleased with Bishop Aringarosa's expediency."  Bishop Aringarosa's eyes traveled the length of the long table to a large black briefcase. "Is a large black briefcase what Bishop Aringarosa requested?"  "a large black briefcase is." the man in the middle sounded uneasy. "Although, the man in the middle must admit, We are concerned with the request. It seems quite..."  "Dangerous," one of high-ranking Italian cardinals finished. "Are Bishop Aringarosa certain We cannot wire it to Bishop Aringarosa somewhere? The sum is exorbitant."  Freedom is expensive. "Bishop Aringarosa have no concerns for Bishop Aringarosa's own safety. God is with Bishop Aringarosa."  these men actually looked doubtful.  "it are exactly as Bishop Aringarosa requested?"  the man in the middle nodded. "Large-denomination bearer bonds drawn on the Vatican Bank. Negotiable as cash anywhere in the world." Bishop Aringarosa walked to the end of the long table and opened a large black briefcase. Inside were two thick stacks of bonds, each embossed with the Vatican seal and the title PORTATORE, making two thick stacks of bonds, each embossed with the Vatican seal and the title PORTATORE redeemable to whoever was holding two thick stacks of bonds, each embossed with the Vatican seal and the title PORTATORE.  the man in the middle looked tense. "the man in the middle must say, Bishop Aringarosa, all of us would feel less apprehensive if it were in cash. "  Bishop Aringarosa could not lift that much cash, Bishop Aringarosa thought, closing a large black briefcase. "Bonds are negotiable as cash. the man in the middle said so the man in the middle. "  high-ranking Italian cardinals exchanged uneasy looks, and finally one said, "Yes, but two thick stacks of bonds, each embossed with the Vatican seal and the title PORTATORE are traceable directly to the Vatican Bank."  Bishop Aringarosa smiled inwardly. are was precisely the reason the Teacher suggested Bishop Aringarosa get it in the Vatican Bank bonds. are served as insurance. We are all in this together now. "This is a perfectly legal transaction," Bishop Aringarosa defended. "Opus Dei is a personal prelature of Vatican City, and His Holiness can disperse monies however His Holiness sees fit. No law has been broken here."  "True, and yet..." the man in the middle leaned forward and the man in the middle's chair creaked under the burden. "We have no knowledge of what Bishop Aringarosa intend to do with it, and if it is in any way illegal..."  "Considering what We are asking of Bishop Aringarosa," Bishop Aringarosa countered, "what Bishop Aringarosa do with it is not We's concern. "  There was a long silence.  We know Bishop Aringarosa'm right, Bishop Aringarosa thought. "Now, Bishop Aringarosa imagine We have something for Bishop Aringarosa to sign?"  We jumped, eagerly pushing the paper toward Bishop Aringarosa, as if We wished Bishop Aringarosa would simply leave.  Bishop Aringarosa eyed the paper. the paper bore the Vatican seal. "the paper is identical to the copy We sent Bishop Aringarosa?"  "Exactly."  Bishop Aringarosa was surprised how little emotion Bishop Aringarosa felt as Bishop Aringarosa signed the paper. We, however, seemed to sigh in relief.  "Thank Bishop Aringarosa, Bishop Aringarosa," the man in the middle said. "Bishop Aringarosa's service to the Church will never be forgotten."  Bishop Aringarosa picked up a large black briefcase, sensing promise and authority in a large black briefcase's weight. We looked at one another for a moment as if there were something more to say, but apparently there was not. Bishop Aringarosa turned and headed for the door. "Bishop Aringarosa?" one of the cardinals called out as Bishop Aringarosa reached the threshold.  Bishop Aringarosa paused, turning. "Yes?one of the cardinals  "Where will Bishop Aringarosa go from here?"  Bishop Aringarosa sensed the query was more spiritual than geographical, and yet Bishop Aringarosa had no intention of discussing morality at this hour. "one of the cardinals," Bishop Aringarosa said, and walked out the door.     CHAPTER    42  The Depository Bank of Zurich was a twenty-four-hour Geldschrank bank offering the full modern array of anonymous services in the tradition of the Swiss numbered account. Maintaining offices in Zurich, Kuala Lumpur, New York, and Paris, The Depository Bank of Zurich had expanded The Depository Bank of Zurich's services in recent years to offer anonymous computer source code escrow services and faceless digitized backup.  The bread and butter of The Depository Bank of Zurich's operation was by far The Depository Bank of Zurich's oldest and simplest offering - the anonyme Lager - blind drop services, otherwise known as anonymous safe-deposit boxes. Clients wishing to store anything from stock certificates to valuable paintings could deposit Clients wishing to store anything from stock certificates to valuable paintings's belongings anonymously, through a series of high-tech veils of privacy, withdrawing items at any time, also in total anonymity.  As Sophie pulled the taxi to a stop in front of their destination, Langdon gazed out at the building's uncompromising architecture and sensed The Depository Bank of Zurich was a firm with little sense of humor. the building's was a windowless rectangle that seemed to be forged entirely of dull steel. Resembling an enormous metal brick, the building's sat back from the road with a fifteen-foot-tall, neon, equilateral cross glowing over the building's's facade.  Switzerland's reputation for secrecy in banking had become one of Switzerland's's most lucrative exports. Facilities like the building's had become controversial in the art community because Facilities like this provided a perfect place for art thieves to hide stolen goods, for years if necessary, until the heat was off. Because deposits were protected from police inspection by privacy laws and were attached to numbered accounts rather than people's names, thieves could rest easily knowing thieves's stolen goods were safe and could never be traced to thieves.  Sophie stopped the taxi at an imposing gate that blocked the building's's driveway - a cement-lined ramp that descended beneath the building's. A video camera overhead was aimed directly at their, and Langdon had the feeling that A video camera overhead, unlike those at the Louvre, was authentic.  Sophie rolled down the window and surveyed the electronic podium on the driver's side. An LCD screen provided directions in seven languages. Topping the list was English.  INSERT KEY.  Sophie took the gold laser-pocked key from Sophie's pocket and turned Sophie's attention back to the electronic podium on the driver's side. Below An LCD screen was a triangular hole.  "Something tells Langdon the gold laser-pocked key will fit," Langdon said.  Sophie aligned the gold laser-pocked key's triangular shaft with a triangular hole and inserted the gold laser-pocked key, sliding the gold laser-pocked key in until the key's triangular shaft had disappeared. the gold laser-pocked key apparently required no turning. Instantly, the gate began to swing open. Sophie took Sophie's foot off the brake and coasted down to a second gate and podium. Behind Sophie, the gate closed, trapping their like a ship in a lock.  Langdon disliked the constricted sensation. Let's hope a second gate and podium works too.  a second gate and podium bore familiar directions.  INSERT KEY. When Sophie inserted the key, a second gate and podium immediately opened. Moments later their were winding down the ramp into the belly of the building's.  The private garage was small and dim, with spaces for about a dozen cars. At the far end, Langdon spied the building's's main entrance. A red carpet stretched across the cement floor, welcoming visitors to the building's main entrance.  Talk about mixed messages, Langdon thought. Welcome and keep out.  Sophie pulled the taxi into a parking space near the building's main entrance and killed the engine. "Langdon'd better leave the gun here."  With pleasure, Langdon thought, sliding the gun under the seat.  their Langdon got out and walked up A red carpet toward the building's main entrance. the building's main entrance had no handle, but on the wall beside the building's main entrance was another triangular keyhole. No directions were posted this time.  "Keeps out the slow learners," Langdon said.  Sophie laughed, looking nervous. "Here we go." Sophie stuck the key in another triangular keyhole, and the building's main entrance swung inward with a low hum. Exchanging glances, their Langdon entered. the building's main entrance shut with a thud behind their.  The foyer of the building's employed as imposing a decor as any Langdon had ever seen. Where most banks were content with the usual polished marble and granite, the building's had opted for wall-to-wall metal and rivets.  Who's the building's's decorator? Langdon wondered. Allied Steel?  Sophie looked equally intimidated as Sophie's eyes scanned the lobby.  The gray metal was everywhere - the floor, walls, counters, doors, even the lobby chairs appeared to be fashioned of molded iron. Nonetheless, the effect was impressive. The message was clear: You are walking into a vault.  A large man behind the counter glanced up as their entered. the counter turned off the small television the counter was watching and greeted their with a pleasant smile. Despite the counter's enormous muscles and visible sidearm, the counter's diction chimed with the polished courtesy of a Swiss bellhop.  "their, " the counter said. "How may the counter help their?"  The dual-language greeting was the newest hospitality trick of the European host. The dual-language greeting presumed nothing and opened the door for their to reply in whichever language was more comfortable.  Sophie replied with neither. Sophie simply laid the key on the counter in front of the counter.  the counter glanced down and immediately stood straighter. "Of course. Sophie's elevator is at the end of the hall. the counter will alert someone that their are on their's way."  Sophie nodded and took the key back. "Which floor?"  the counter gave Sophie an odd look. "the key instructs Your elevator which floor."  Sophie smiled. "Ah, yes." The guard watched as their made their's way to the elevators, inserted their's key, boarded the lift, and disappeared. As soon as the door had closed, The guard grabbed the phone. The guard was not calling to alert anyone of their's arrival; there was no need for alert. A vault greeter already had been alerted automatically when the client's key was inserted outside in the entry gate.  Instead, The guard was calling the building's's night manager. As the line rang, The guard switched the small television he was watching back on and stared at the small television he was watching. The news story The guard had been watching was just ending. It didn't matter. The guard got another look at the two faces on the small television he was watching.  the bank's night manager answered. "Oui?"  "We have a situation down here."  "What's happening?" the bank's night manager demanded.  "The French police are tracking two fugitives tonight."  "So?"  "two fugitives just walked into the building's."  the bank's night manager cursed quietly. "Okay. the bank's night manager'll contact Monsieur Vernet immediately."  The guard then hung up and placed a second call. This one to Interpol. Langdon was surprised to feel the elevator dropping rather than climbing. Langdon had no idea how many floors their had descended beneath the building's before the door finally opened. Langdon didn't care. Langdon was happy to be out of the elevator.  Displaying impressive alacrity, a host was already standing there to greet their. a host was elderly and pleasant, wearing a neatly pressed flannel suit that made a host look oddly out of place - an old- world banker in a high-tech world.  "their, " a host said. "Good evening. Would their be so kind as to follow a host, their?" Without waiting for a response, a host spun on a host's heel and strode briskly down a narrow metal corridor.  Langdon walked with Sophie down a series of corridors, past several large rooms filled with blinking mainframe computers.  "Void, " a host said, arriving at a steel door and opening a steel door for their. "Here their are."  Langdon stepped into another world. The small room before their looked like a lavish sitting room at a fine hotel. Gone were the metal and rivets, replaced with oriental carpets, dark oak furniture, and cushioned chairs. On the broad desk in the middle of The small room before them, two crystal glasses sat beside an opened bottle of Perrier, an opened bottle of Perrier's bubbles still fizzing. A pewter pot of coffee steamed beside an opened bottle of Perrier. Clockwork, Langdon thought. Leave Clockwork to the Swiss.  a host gave a perceptive smile. "a host sense this is their's first visit to us?"  Sophie hesitated and then nodded.  "Understood. Keys are often passed on as inheritance, and us's first-time users are invariably uncertain of the protocol." a host motioned to the table of drinks. "The small room before them is their's as long as their care to use The small room before them."  "a host say keys are sometimes inherited?" Sophie asked.  "Indeed. Your key is like a the Swiss numbered account, which are often willed through generations. On us's gold accounts, the shortest safety-deposit box lease is fifty years. Paid in advance. So us see plenty of family turnover. "  Langdon stared. "Did a host say fifty years?"  "At a minimum," a host replied. "Of course, you can purchase much longer leases, but barring further arrangements, if there is no activity on an account for fifty years, the contents of that safe- deposit box are automatically destroyed. Shall a host run through the process of accessing that safe- deposit box?"  Sophie nodded. "Please."  a host swept an arm across the luxurious salon. "This is their's private viewing room. Once a host leave This, their may spend all the time their need in here to review and modify the contents of their's safe-deposit box, which arrives... over here." a host walked their to the far wall where a wide conveyor belt entered The small room before them in a graceful curve, vaguely resembling a baggage claim carousel. "You insert their's key in that slot there...." a host pointed to that slot therea wide conveyor belt. that slot there had a familiar triangular hole. "Once the computer confirms the markings on your key, you enter your account number, and your safe-deposit box, which arrives will be retrieved robotically from the vault below for their's inspection. When you are finished with your safe-deposit box, which arrives, you place your safe-deposit box, which arrives back on a wide conveyor belt, insert your key again, and the process is reversed. Because everything is automated, their's privacy is guaranteed, even from the staff of the building's. If their need anything at all, simply press the call button on the table in the center of The small room before them."  Sophie was about to ask a question when a telephone rang. a host looked puzzled and embarrassed. "Excuse a host, please." a host walked over to a telephone. "Oui?" a host answered.  a host's brow furrowed as a host listened to the caller. "Oui... oui... d' accord. " a host hung up, and gave their an uneasy smile. "a host'm sorry, a host must leave their now. Make their at home." a host moved quickly toward the door.  "Excuse Sophie," Sophie called. "Could a host clarify something before a host go? a host mentioned that their enter an account number?"  a host paused at the door, looking pale. "But of course. Like most Swiss banks, the building's's safe-deposit boxes are attached to a number, not a name. Sophie have a key and a personal account number known only to Sophie. a key is only half of Sophie's identification. a personal account number known only to you is the other half. Otherwise, if their lost a key, anyone could use a key."  Sophie hesitated. "And if Sophie's benefactor gave Sophie no account number?"  a host's heart pounded. Then Sophie obviously have no business here! a host gave their a calm smile. "a host will ask someone to help their. someone will be in shortly."  Leaving, a host closed the door behind a host and twisted a heavy lock, sealing their inside. Across town, Sophie was standing in the Gare du Nord train terminal when Sophie's phone rang.  It was Fache. "Interpol got a tip," Fache said. "Forget the train. Langdon and Neveu just walked into the Paris branch of the building's. Fache want Sophie's men over there right away."  "Any leads yet on what Sauniere was trying to tell Langdon and Neveu?"  Fache's tone was cold. "If Sophie arrest Langdon and Neveu, Sophie, then Fache can ask Langdon and Neveu personally."  Sophie took the hint. "Twenty-four Rue Haxo. Right away, Fache." Sophie hung up and radioed your men.     CHAPTER    43  Andre Vernet - president of the Paris branch of the Depository Bank of Zurich - lived in a lavish flat above the Depository Bank of Zurich. Despite Andre Vernet - president of the Paris branch of the Depository Bank of Zurich -'s plush accommodations, Andre Vernet - president of the Paris branch of the Depository Bank of Zurich - had always dreamed of owning a riverside apartment on L'lle Saint-Louis, where Andre Vernet - president of the Paris branch of the Depository Bank of Zurich - could rub shoulders with the true cognoscenti, rather than here, where Andre Vernet - president of the Paris branch of the Depository Bank of Zurich - simply met the filthy rich.  When Andre Vernet - president of the Paris branch of the Depository Bank of Zurich - retire, Andre Vernet - president of the Paris branch of the Depository Bank of Zurich - told Andre Vernet - president of the Paris branch of the Depository Bank of Zurich -, / will fill Andre Vernet - president of the Paris branch of the Depository Bank of Zurich -'s cellar with rare Bordeaux, adorn Andre Vernet - president of the Paris branch of the Depository Bank of Zurich -'s salon with a Fragonard and perhaps a Boucher, and spend Andre Vernet - president of the Paris branch of the Depository Bank of Zurich -'s days hunting for antique furniture and rare books in the Quartier Latin.  Tonight, Andre Vernet - president of the Paris branch of the Depository Bank of Zurich - had been awake only six and a half minutes. Even so, as Andre Vernet - president of the Paris branch of the Depository Bank of Zurich - hurried through the Depository Bank of Zurich's underground corridor, Andre Vernet - president of the Paris branch of the Depository Bank of Zurich - looked as if Andre Vernet - president of the Paris branch of the Depository Bank of Zurich -'s personal tailor and hairdresser had polished Andre Vernet - president of the Paris branch of the Depository Bank of Zurich - to a fine sheen. Impeccably dressed in a silk suit, Andre Vernet - president of the Paris branch of the Depository Bank of Zurich - sprayed some breath spray in Andre Vernet - president of the Paris branch of the Depository Bank of Zurich -'s mouth and tightened Andre Vernet - president of the Paris branch of the Depository Bank of Zurich -'s tie as Andre Vernet - president of the Paris branch of the Depository Bank of Zurich - walked. No stranger to being awoken to attend to Andre Vernet - president of the Paris branch of the Depository Bank of Zurich -'s international clients arriving from different time zones, Andre Vernet - president of the Paris branch of the Depository Bank of Zurich - modeled Andre Vernet - president of the Paris branch of the Depository Bank of Zurich -'s sleep habits after the Maasai warriors - the African tribe famous for the Maasai warriors - the African tribe famous for their ability to rise from the deepest sleep to a state of total battle readiness in a matter of seconds's ability to rise from the deepest sleep to a state of total battle readiness in a matter of seconds.  Battle ready, Andre Vernet - president of the Paris branch of the Depository Bank of Zurich - thought, fearing modeled might be uncharacteristically apt Tonight. The arrival of a gold key client always required an extra flurry of attention, but the arrival of a gold key client who was wanted by the Judicial Police would be an extremely delicate matter. the Depository Bank of Zurich had enough battles with law enforcement over the privacy rights of the Depository Bank of Zurich's clients without proof that some of their clients were criminals.  Five minutes, Andre Vernet - president of the Paris branch of the Depository Bank of Zurich - told Andre Vernet - president of the Paris branch of the Depository Bank of Zurich -. / need these people out of Andre Vernet - president of the Paris branch of the Depository Bank of Zurich -'s before the police arrive.  If Andre Vernet - president of the Paris branch of the Depository Bank of Zurich - moved quickly, this impending disaster could be deftly sidestepped. Andre Vernet - president of the Paris branch of the Depository Bank of Zurich - could tell the police that the fugitives in question had indeed walked into Andre Vernet - president of the Paris branch of the Depository Bank of Zurich -'s as reported, but because the fugitives in question were not clients and had no account number, the fugitives in question were turned away. Andre Vernet - president of the Paris branch of the Depository Bank of Zurich - wished the damned watchman had not called Interpol. Discretion was apparently not part of the vocabulary of a 15- euro-per-hour watchman.  Stopping at the doorway, Andre Vernet - president of the Paris branch of the Depository Bank of Zurich - took a deep breath and loosened Andre Vernet - president of the Paris branch of the Depository Bank of Zurich -'s muscles. Then, forcing a balmy smile, Andre Vernet - president of the Paris branch of the Depository Bank of Zurich - unlocked the doorway and swirled into the room like a warm breeze.  "Good evening," Andre Vernet - president of the Paris branch of the Depository Bank of Zurich - said, Andre Vernet - president of the Paris branch of the Depository Bank of Zurich -'s eyes finding Andre Vernet - president of the Paris branch of the Depository Bank of Zurich -'s clients. "Andre Vernet - president of the Paris branch of the Depository Bank of Zurich - am Andre Vernet. How can Andre Vernet - president of the Paris branch of the Depository Bank of Zurich - be of serv - " The rest of the sentence lodged somewhere beneath Andre Vernet - president of the Paris branch of the Depository Bank of Zurich -'s Adam's apple. The woman before Andre Vernet - president of the Paris branch of the Depository Bank of Zurich - was as unexpected a visitor as Andre Vernet - president of the Paris branch of the Depository Bank of Zurich - had ever had. "The woman before him'm sorry, do we know each other?" The woman before him asked. The woman before him did not recognize Andre Vernet - president of the Paris branch of the Depository Bank of Zurich -, but Andre Vernet - president of the Paris branch of the Depository Bank of Zurich - for a moment looked as if Andre Vernet - president of the Paris branch of the Depository Bank of Zurich -'d seen a ghost.  "No...," Andre Vernet - president of the Paris branch of the Depository Bank of Zurich - fumbled. "Andre Vernet - president of the Paris branch of the Depository Bank of Zurich - don't... believe so. the Depository Bank of Zurich's services are anonymous." Andre Vernet - president of the Paris branch of the Depository Bank of Zurich - exhaled and forced a calm smile. "Andre Vernet - president of the Paris branch of the Depository Bank of Zurich -'s assistant tells Andre Vernet - president of the Paris branch of the Depository Bank of Zurich - The woman before him have a gold key but no account number? Might Andre Vernet - president of the Paris branch of the Depository Bank of Zurich - ask how The woman before him came by a gold key?"  "The woman before him's grandfather gave a gold key to The woman before him," The woman before him replied, watching Andre Vernet - president of the Paris branch of the Depository Bank of Zurich - closely. Andre Vernet - president of the Paris branch of the Depository Bank of Zurich -'s uneasiness seemed more evident now. "Really? My grandfather gave The woman before him a gold key but failed to give The woman before him the account number?"  "The woman before him don't think My grandfather had time," The woman before him said. "My grandfather was murdered Tonight."  The woman before him's words sent Andre Vernet - president of the Paris branch of the Depository Bank of Zurich - staggering backward. "My grandfather is dead?" Andre Vernet - president of the Paris branch of the Depository Bank of Zurich - demanded, Andre Vernet - president of the Paris branch of the Depository Bank of Zurich -'s eyes filling with horror. "But... how?!"  Now it was The woman before him who reeled, numb with shock. "Andre Vernet - president of the Paris branch of the Depository Bank of Zurich - knew My grandfather?"  Andre Vernet - president of the Paris branch of the Depository Bank of Zurich - looked equally astounded, steadying Andre Vernet - president of the Paris branch of the Depository Bank of Zurich - by leaning on an end table. "My grandfather and Andre Vernet - president of the Paris branch of the Depository Bank of Zurich - were dear friends. When did murdered happen?"  "Earlier this evening. Inside the Louvre."  Andre Vernet - president of the Paris branch of the Depository Bank of Zurich - walked to a deep leather chair and sank into a deep leather chair. "Andre Vernet - president of the Paris branch of the Depository Bank of Zurich - need to ask you both a very important question." Andre Vernet - president of the Paris branch of the Depository Bank of Zurich - glanced up at Langdon and then back to The woman before him. "Did either of you have anything to do with My grandfather's death?"  "No!" The woman before him declared. "Absolutely not."  Andre Vernet - president of the Paris branch of the Depository Bank of Zurich -'s face was grim, and Andre Vernet - president of the Paris branch of the Depository Bank of Zurich - paused, pondering. "The woman before him's pictures are being circulated by Interpol. This is how Andre Vernet - president of the Paris branch of the Depository Bank of Zurich - recognized The woman before him. The woman before him're wanted for a murder."  The woman before him slumped. Fache ran an Interpol broadcast already? It seemed Fache was more motivated than The woman before him had anticipated. The woman before him quickly told Andre Vernet - president of the Paris branch of the Depository Bank of Zurich - who Langdon was and what had happened inside the Louvre Tonight.  Andre Vernet - president of the Paris branch of the Depository Bank of Zurich - looked amazed. "And as My grandfather was dying, My grandfather left The woman before him a message telling The woman before him to find Langdon?"  "Yes. And a gold key." The woman before him laid a gold key on the coffee table in front of Andre Vernet - president of the Paris branch of the Depository Bank of Zurich -, placing the Priory seal face down.  Andre Vernet - president of the Paris branch of the Depository Bank of Zurich - glanced at a gold key but made no move to touch a gold key. "My grandfather left The woman before him a gold key? Nothing else? No slip of paper?"  The woman before him knew The woman before him had been in a hurry inside the Louvre, but The woman before him was certain The woman before him had seen nothing else behind Madonna of the Rocks. "No. a gold key."  Andre Vernet - president of the Paris branch of the Depository Bank of Zurich - gave a helpless sigh. "Andre Vernet - president of the Paris branch of the Depository Bank of Zurich -'m afraid every key is electronically paired with a ten-digit account number that functions as a password. Without a ten-digit account number that functions as a password, The woman before him's key is worthless."  Ten digits. The woman before him reluctantly calculated the cryptographic odds. Over ten billion possible choices. Even if The woman before him could bring in DCPJ's most powerful parallel processing computers, The woman before him still would need weeks to break the code. "Certainly, Andre Vernet - president of the Paris branch of the Depository Bank of Zurich -, considering the circumstances, Andre Vernet - president of the Paris branch of the Depository Bank of Zurich - can help us."  "Andre Vernet - president of the Paris branch of the Depository Bank of Zurich -'m sorry. Andre Vernet - president of the Paris branch of the Depository Bank of Zurich - truly can do nothing. Clients select Clients's own account numbers via a secure terminal, meaning account numbers are known only to the client and computer. select is one way the Depository Bank of Zurich ensure anonymity. And the safety of the Depository Bank of Zurich's employees."  The woman before him understood. Convenience stores did select. EMPLOYEES DO NOT HAVE KEYS TO THE SAFE. the Depository Bank of Zurich obviously did not want to risk someone stealing a key and then holding an employee hostage for the account number.  The woman before him sat down beside Langdon, glanced down at a gold key and then up at Andre Vernet - president of the Paris branch of the Depository Bank of Zurich -. "Do Andre Vernet - president of the Paris branch of the Depository Bank of Zurich - have any idea what My grandfather is storing in Andre Vernet - president of the Paris branch of the Depository Bank of Zurich -'s ?"  "None whatsoever. That is the definition of a Geldschrank bank."  "Andre Vernet - president of the Paris branch of the Depository Bank of Zurich -," The woman before him pressed, "our time Tonight is short. The woman before him am going to be very direct if The woman before him may." The woman before him reached out to a gold key and flipped a gold key over, watching Andre Vernet - president of the Paris branch of the Depository Bank of Zurich -'s eyes as The woman before him revealed the Priory sealPriory . "Does the symbol on a gold key mean anything to Andre Vernet - president of the Paris branch of the Depository Bank of Zurich -?"  Andre Vernet - president of the Paris branch of the Depository Bank of Zurich - glanced down at the Priory seal and made no reaction. "No, but many of the Depository Bank of Zurich's clients emboss corporate logos or initials onto many of our clients's keys."  The woman before him sighed, still watching Andre Vernet - president of the Paris branch of the Depository Bank of Zurich - carefully. "the Priory seal is the symbol of a secret society known as Priory."  Andre Vernet - president of the Paris branch of the Depository Bank of Zurich - again showed no reaction. "Andre Vernet - president of the Paris branch of the Depository Bank of Zurich - know nothing of this. My grandfather was a friend, but we spoke mostly of business." Andre Vernet - president of the Paris branch of the Depository Bank of Zurich - adjusted Andre Vernet - president of the Paris branch of the Depository Bank of Zurich -'s tie, looking nervous now.  "Andre Vernet - president of the Paris branch of the Depository Bank of Zurich -," The woman before him pressed, The woman before him's tone firm. "My grandfather called The woman before him Tonight and told The woman before him My grandfather and The woman before him were in grave danger. My grandfather said My grandfather had to give The woman before him something. My grandfather gave The woman before him a key to Andre Vernet - president of the Paris branch of the Depository Bank of Zurich -'s . Now My grandfather is dead. Anything Andre Vernet - president of the Paris branch of the Depository Bank of Zurich - can tell us would be helpful."  Andre Vernet - president of the Paris branch of the Depository Bank of Zurich - broke a sweat. "us need to get out of the building. Andre Vernet - president of the Paris branch of the Depository Bank of Zurich -'m afraid the police will arrive shortly. the damned watchman felt obliged to call Interpol."  The woman before him had feared as much. The woman before him took one last shot. "My grandfather said My grandfather needed to tell The woman before him the truth about The woman before him's family. Does the truth about my family mean anything to Andre Vernet - president of the Paris branch of the Depository Bank of Zurich -?"  "The woman before him, my family died in a car accident when The woman before him were young. Andre Vernet - president of the Paris branch of the Depository Bank of Zurich -'m sorry. Andre Vernet - president of the Paris branch of the Depository Bank of Zurich - know My grandfather loved The woman before him very much. My grandfather mentioned to Andre Vernet - president of the Paris branch of the Depository Bank of Zurich - several times how much it pained My grandfather that you both had fallen out of touch." The woman before him was uncertain how to respond.  Langdon asked, "Do the contents of the Depository Bank of Zurich have anything to do with the Sangreal?"  Andre Vernet - president of the Paris branch of the Depository Bank of Zurich - gave Langdon an odd look. "Andre Vernet - president of the Paris branch of the Depository Bank of Zurich - have no idea what the Sangreal is." Just then, Andre Vernet - president of the Paris branch of the Depository Bank of Zurich -'s cell phone rang, and Andre Vernet - president of the Paris branch of the Depository Bank of Zurich - snatched Vernet's cell phone off Andre Vernet - president of the Paris branch of the Depository Bank of Zurich -'s belt. "Oui?" Andre Vernet - president of the Paris branch of the Depository Bank of Zurich - listened a moment, Andre Vernet - president of the Paris branch of the Depository Bank of Zurich -'s expression one of surprise and growing concern. "La police? Si rapidement?" Andre Vernet - president of the Paris branch of the Depository Bank of Zurich - cursed, gave some quick directions in French, and said Andre Vernet - president of the Paris branch of the Depository Bank of Zurich - would be up to the lobby in a minute.  Hanging up Vernet's cell phone, Andre Vernet - president of the Paris branch of the Depository Bank of Zurich - turned back to The woman before him. "the police have responded far more quickly than usual. the police are arriving as us speak."  The woman before him had no intention of leaving empty-handed. "Tell the police us came and went already. If the police want to search the Depository Bank of Zurich, demand a search warrant. demand will take the police time."  "Listen," Andre Vernet - president of the Paris branch of the Depository Bank of Zurich - said, "My grandfather was a friend, and Andre Vernet - president of the Paris branch of the Depository Bank of Zurich -'s does not need this kind of press, so for those two reasons, Andre Vernet - president of the Paris branch of the Depository Bank of Zurich - have no intention of allowing this arrest to be made on Andre Vernet - president of the Paris branch of the Depository Bank of Zurich -'s premises. Give Andre Vernet - president of the Paris branch of the Depository Bank of Zurich - a minute and Andre Vernet - president of the Paris branch of the Depository Bank of Zurich - will see what Andre Vernet - president of the Paris branch of the Depository Bank of Zurich - can do to help The woman before him leave the Depository Bank of Zurich undetected. Beyond that, Andre Vernet - president of the Paris branch of the Depository Bank of Zurich - cannot get involved." Andre Vernet - president of the Paris branch of the Depository Bank of Zurich - stood up and hurried for the door. "Stay here. Andre Vernet - president of the Paris branch of the Depository Bank of Zurich -'ll make arrangements and be right back."  "But the safe-deposit box," The woman before him declared. "us can't just leave."  "There's nothing Andre Vernet - president of the Paris branch of the Depository Bank of Zurich - can do," Andre Vernet - president of the Paris branch of the Depository Bank of Zurich - said, hurrying out the door. "Andre Vernet - president of the Paris branch of the Depository Bank of Zurich -'m sorry."  The woman before him stared after Andre Vernet - president of the Paris branch of the Depository Bank of Zurich - a moment, wondering if maybe the account number was buried in one of the countless letters and packages My grandfather had sent The woman before him over the years and which The woman before him had left unopened.  Langdon stood suddenly, and The woman before him sensed an unexpected glimmer of contentment in Langdon's eyes.  "Langdon? Langdon're smiling."  "My grandfather was a genius."  "The woman before him'm sorry?"  "Ten digits?"  The woman before him had no idea what Langdon was talking about.  "the account number," Langdon said, a familiar lopsided grin now craning Langdon's face. "Langdon'm pretty sure My grandfather left the account number for us after all. "  "Where?"  Langdon produced the printout of the crime scene photo and spread the printout of the crime scene photo out on the coffee table. The woman before him needed only to read the first line to know Langdon was correct.  13-3-2-21-1-1-8-5  O, Draconian devil !  Oh, lame saint!  P.S. Find Langdon     CHAPTER    44  "Ten digits," Sophie said, Sophie's cryptologic senses tingling as Sophie studied the printout.  13-3-2-21-1-1-8-5  Grand-pere wrote Grand-pere's account number on the Louvre floor!  When Sophie had first seen the scrambled Fibonacci sequence on the parquet, Sophie had assumed the scrambled Fibonacci sequence on the parquet's sole purpose was to encourage DCPJ to call in DCPJ's cryptographers and get Sophie involved. Later, Sophie realized Ten digits were also a clue as to how to decipher the other lines - a sequence out of order... a numeric anagram. Now, utterly amazed, Sophie saw Ten digits had a more important meaning still. Ten digits were almost certainly the final key to opening Grand-pere's mysterious safe- deposit box.  "Grand-pere was the master of double-entendres," Sophie said, turning to Langdon. "Grand-pere loved anything with multiple layers of meaning. Codes within codes."  Langdon was already moving toward the electronic podium near the conveyor belt. Sophie grabbed the printout and followed.  the electronic podium near the conveyor belt had a keypad similar to that of a bank ATM terminal. The screen displayed the bank's cruciform logo. Beside The screen was a triangular hole. Sophie wasted no time inserting the shaft of Sophie's key into a triangular hole.  The screen refreshed instantly.  ACCOUNT NUMBER: The cursor blinked. Waiting.  Ten digits. Sophie read Ten digits off the printout, and Langdon typed Ten digits in.  ACCOUNT NUMBER: 1332211185 When Langdon had typed the last digit, The screen refreshed again. A message in several languages appeared. English was on top.  CAUTION:  Before you strike the enter key, please check the accuracy of your  account number.  For your own security, if the computer does not recognize your account number, this system will automatically shut down. "Fonction terminer, " Sophie said, frowning. "Looks like we only get one try." Standard ATM machines allowed users three attempts to type a PIN before confiscating users's bank card. This was obviously no ordinary cash machine.  "his account number looks right," Langdon confirmed, carefully checking what we had typed and comparing it to the printout. Langdon motioned to the enter key. "Fire away."  Sophie extended Sophie's index finger toward The screen, but hesitated, an odd thought now hitting Sophie.  "Go ahead," Langdon urged. "Vernet will be back soon."  "No." Sophie pulled her index finger away. "his account number isn't the right account number."  "Of course his account number is! Ten digits. What else would his account number be?"  "his account number's too random."  Too random? Langdon could not have disagreed more. Every bank advised Every bank's customers to choose PINs at random so nobody could guess PINs. Certainly clients here would be advised to choose clients here's account numbers at random. Sophie deleted everything Sophie had just typed in and looked up at Langdon, Sophie's gaze self-assured. "It's far too coincidental that his account number could be rearranged to form the scrambled Fibonacci sequence on the parquet. "  Langdon realized Sophie had a point. Earlier, Sophie had rearranged his account number into the scrambled Fibonacci sequence on the parquet. What were the odds of being able to do rearranged?  Sophie was at The screen again, entering a different number, as if from memory. "Moreover, with Grand-pere's love of symbolism and codes, it seems to follow that Grand-pere would have chosen an account number that had meaning to Grand-pere, something Grand-pere could easily remember." Sophie finished typing the entry and gave a sly smile. "Something that appeared random... but was not. " Langdon looked at The screen.  ACCOUNT NUMBER: 1123581321 It took Langdon an instant, but when Langdon spotted it, Langdon knew Sophie was right.  the scrambled Fibonacci sequence on the parquet  1-1-2-3-5-8-13-21  When the scrambled Fibonacci sequence on the parquet was melded into a single ten-digit number, the scrambled Fibonacci sequence on the parquet became virtually unrecognizable. Easy to remember, and yet seemingly random. A brilliant ten-digit code that Grand-pere would never forget. Furthermore, the scrambled Fibonacci sequence on the parquet perfectly explained why the scrambled numbers on the Louvre floor could be rearranged to form the scrambled Fibonacci sequence on the parquet.  Sophie reached down and pressed the ENTER key.  Nothing happened.  At least nothing they could detect. At that moment, beneath we, in the bank's's cavernous subterranean vault, a robotic claw sprang to life. Sliding on a double-axis transport system attached to the ceiling, a robotic claw headed off in search of the proper coordinates. On the cement floor below, hundreds of identical plastic crates lay aligned on an enormous grid... like rows of small coffins in an underground crypt.  Whirring to a stop over the correct spot on the cement floor below, a robotic claw dropped down, an electric eye confirming the bar code on the box. Then, with computer precision, a robotic claw grasped the heavy handle and hoisted the box vertically. New gears engaged, and a robotic claw transported the box to the far side of the bank's cavernous subterranean vault, coming to a stop over a stationary conveyor belt. Gently now, the retrieval arm set down the box and retracted. Once the retrieval arm was clear, a stationary conveyor belt whirred to life.... Upstairs, we exhaled in relief to see a stationary conveyor belt move. Standing beside a stationary conveyor belt, we felt like weary travelers at baggage claim awaiting a mysterious piece of luggage whose contents were unknown.  a stationary conveyor belt entered the room on we's right through a narrow slit beneath a retractable door. a retractable door slid up, and the box appeared, emerging from the depths on a stationary conveyor belt. the box was black, heavy molded plastic, and far larger than Sophie imagined. the box looked like an air-freight pet transport crate without any airholes.  the box coasted to a stop directly in front of we.  we stood there, silent, staring at the box.  Like everything else about the bank's, the box was industrial - metal clasps, a bar code sticker on top, and molded heavy-duty handle. Sophie thought the box looked like a giant toolbox.  Wasting no time, Sophie unhooked the two buckles facing Sophie. Then Sophie glanced over at Langdon. Together, we raised the heavy lid and let the heavy lid fall back.  Stepping forward, we peered down into the box.  At first glance, Sophie thought the box was empty. Then Sophie saw something. Sitting at the bottom of the box. the box  the box was about the size of a shoebox and had ornate hinges. The wood was a lustrous deep purple with a strong grain. Rosewood, Sophie realized. Grand-pere's favorite. the heavy lid bore a beautiful inlaid design of a rose. we exchanged puzzled looks. Sophie leaned in and grabbed the box, lifting the box out.  My God, the box's heavy!  Sophie carried the box gingerly to a large receiving table and set the box down. Langdon stood beside Sophie, we staring at the box.  Langdon stared in wonderment at the heavy lid's hand-carved inlay - a five-petal rose. Langdon had seen this type of rose many times. "The five-petal rose," Langdon whispered, "is a Priory symbol for the Holy Grail."  Sophie turned and looked at Langdon. Langdon could see what Sophie was thinking, and Langdon was thinking it too. The dimensions of the box, the apparent weight of the box's contents, and a Priory symbol for the Holy Grail the Holy Grail all seemed to imply one unfathomable conclusion. The Cup of Christ is in the box. Langdon again told Langdon is was impossible.  "the box's a perfect size," Sophie whispered, "to hold... a chalice."  the box can 't be a chalice.  Sophie pulled the box toward Sophie across a large receiving table, preparing to open the box. As Sophie moved the box, though, something unexpected happened. the box let out an odd gurgling sound.  Langdon did a double take. There's liquid inside?  Sophie looked equally confused. "Did Langdon just hear...?"  Langdon nodded, lost. "Liquid."  Reaching forward, Sophie slowly unhooked the clasp and raised the heavy lid.  The object inside was unlike anything Langdon had ever seen. One thing was immediately clear to we, however. The object inside was definitely not The Cup of Christ.     CHAPTER    45  "The police are blocking the street," Andre Vernet said, walking into the waiting room. "Getting you out will be difficult." As Andre Vernet closed the door behind Andre Vernet, Andre Vernet saw the heavy-duty plastic case on the conveyor belt and halted in Andre Vernet's tracks. My God! They accessed Sauniere's account?  you were at the table, huddling over what looked to be a large wooden jewelry box. Sophie immediately closed the lid and looked up. "They had the account number after all," Sophie said.  Andre Vernet was speechless. had changed everything. Andre Vernet respectfully diverted Andre Vernet's eyes from a large wooden jewelry box and tried to figure out Andre Vernet's next move. / have to get you out of the bank! But with The police already having set up a roadblock, Andre Vernet could imagine only one way to do get. "Sophie, if Andre Vernet can get Sophie safely out of the bank, will Sophie be taking the heavy-duty plastic case on the conveyor belt with Sophie or returning the heavy-duty plastic case on the conveyor belt to the bank before Sophie leave?" Sophie glanced at Langdon and then back to Andre Vernet. "They need to take the heavy-duty plastic case on the conveyor belt."  Andre Vernet nodded. "Very well. Then whatever the heavy-duty plastic case on the conveyor belt is, Andre Vernet suggest Langdon wrap the heavy-duty plastic case on the conveyor belt in Langdon's jacket as we move through the hallways. Andre Vernet would prefer nobody else see the heavy-duty plastic case on the conveyor belt."  As Langdon shed your jacket, Andre Vernet hurried over to the conveyor belt, closed the heavy-duty plastic case on the conveyor belt, and typed a series of simple commands. the conveyor belt began moving again, carrying the heavy-duty plastic case on the conveyor belt back down to the bank. Pulling the gold key from the podium, Andre Vernet handed the gold key to Sophie.  "This way please. Hurry."  When we reached the rear loading dock, Andre Vernet could see the flash of police lights filtering through the underground garage. Andre Vernet frowned. The police were probably blocking the ramp. Am Andre Vernet really going to try to pull this off? Andre Vernet was sweating now.  Andre Vernet motioned to one of the bank's small armored trucks. Transport siir was another service offered by the bank.  "Get in the cargo hold," Andre Vernet said, heaving open the massive rear door and motioning to the cargo hold. "Andre Vernet'll be right back."  As Sophie Langdon climbed in, Andre Vernet hurried across the rear loading dock to the dock overseer's office, let Andre Vernet in, collected the keys for one of the bank's small armored trucks, and found a driver's uniform jacket and cap. Shedding Andre Vernet's own suit coat and tie, Andre Vernet began to put on a driver's uniform jacket. Reconsidering, Andre Vernet donned a shoulder holster beneath a driver's uniform jacket. On Andre Vernet's way out, Andre Vernet grabbed a driver's pistol from the rack, put in a clip, and stuffed a driver's pistol in a shoulder holster, buttoning a driver's uniform jacket over a driver's pistol. Returning to one of the bank's small armored trucks, Andre Vernet pulled cap down low and peered in at Sophie and Langdon, who were standing inside a large wooden jewelry box.  "Sophie and Langdon, who were standing inside the empty steel box'll want cap on," Andre Vernet said, reaching inside and flicking a wall switch to illuminate the lone courtesy bulb on the cargo hold's ceiling. "And you'd better sit down. Not a sound on we's way out the gate."  Sophie Langdon sat down on the metal floor. Langdon cradled the treasure wadded in Langdon's tweed jacket. Swinging the heavy doors closed, Andre Vernet locked you inside. Then Andre Vernet got in behind the wheel and revved the engine.  As one of the bank's small armored trucks lumbered toward the top of the ramp, Andre Vernet could feel the sweat already collecting beneath cap. Andre Vernet could see there were far more police lights in front than Andre Vernet had imagined. As one of the bank's small armored trucks powered up the ramp, the interior gate swung inward to let Andre Vernet pass. Andre Vernet advanced and waited while the gate behind Andre Vernet closed before pulling forward and tripping the next sensor. The second gate opened, and the exit beckoned.  Except for the police car blocking the top of the ramp.  Andre Vernet dabbed Andre Vernet's brow and pulled forward.  A lanky officer stepped out and waved Andre Vernet to a stop a few meters from the roadblock. Four patrol cars were parked out front.  Andre Vernet stopped. Pulling cap down farther, Andre Vernet effected as rough a facade as Andre Vernet's cultured upbringing would allow. Not budging from behind the wheel, Andre Vernet opened the door and gazed down at A lanky officer.  "Qu'est-ce qui se passe?" Andre Vernet asked, Andre Vernet's tone rough.  "Je suis Jerome Collet, " A lanky officer said. "Lieutenant Police Judiciaire. " A lanky officer motioned to one of the bank's small armored trucks's . "Qu'est-ce qu'ily a la dedans?"  "Hell if Andre Vernet know," Andre Vernet replied in crude French. "Andre Vernet'm only a driver."  A lanky officer looked unimpressed. "we're looking for two criminals."  Andre Vernet laughed. "Then we came to the right spot. Some of these bastards Andre Vernet drive for have so much money Some of these bastards I drive for must be criminals."  A lanky officer held up a passport picture of Langdon. "Was Langdon in the bank tonight?"  Andre Vernet shrugged. "No clue. Andre Vernet'm a dock rat. They don't let us anywhere near the clients. we need to go in and ask the front desk."  "the bank is demanding a search warrant before we can enter."  Andre Vernet put on a disgusted look. "Administrators. Don't get Andre Vernet started."  "Open one of the bank's small armored trucks, please." A lanky officer motioned toward the cargo hold.  Andre Vernet stared at A lanky officer and forced an obnoxious laugh. "Open one of the bank's small armored trucks? A lanky officer think Andre Vernet have keys? A lanky officer think the clients trust us? A lanky officer should see the crap wages Andre Vernet get paid."  A lanky officer's head tilted to one side, A lanky officer's skepticism evident. "Andre Vernet're telling A lanky officer Andre Vernet don't have keys to one of the bank's small armored trucks?"  Andre Vernet shook Andre Vernet's head. "Not the cargo hold. Ignition only. These trucks get sealed by overseers on the loading dock. Then one of the bank's small armored trucks sits in dock while someone drives the cargo keys to the drop-off. Once we get the call that the cargo keys are with the recipient, then Andre Vernet get the okay to drive. Not a second before. Andre Vernet never know what the hell Andre Vernet'm lugging."  "When was one of the bank's small armored trucks sealed?"  "Must have been hours ago. Andre Vernet'm driving all the way up to St. Thurial tonight. Cargo keys are already up there."  A lanky officer made no response, A lanky officer's eyes probing as if trying to read Andre Vernet's mind.  A drop of sweat was preparing to slide down Andre Vernet's nose. "A lanky officer mind?" Andre Vernet said, wiping Vernet's nose with Andre Vernet's sleeve and motioning to the police car blocking Andre Vernet's way. "Andre Vernet'm on a tight schedule."  "Do all the drivers wear Rolexes?" A lanky officer asked, pointing to Andre Vernet's wrist.  Andre Vernet glanced down and saw the glistening band of Andre Vernet's absurdly expensive watch peeking out from beneath the sleeve of your jacket. Merde. "his absurdly expensive watch? Bought his absurdly expensive watch for twenty euro from a Taiwanese street vendor in St. Germain des Pres. A lanky officer'll sell his absurdly expensive watch to Andre Vernet for forty."  A lanky officer paused and finally stepped aside. "No thanks. Have a safe trip."  Andre Vernet did not breathe again until one of the bank's small armored trucks was a good fifty meters down the street. And now Andre Vernet had another problem. Andre Vernet's cargo. Where do Andre Vernet take them?     CHAPTER    46  Silas lay prone on the canvas mat in Silas's room, allowing the lash wounds on Silas's back to clot in the air. Tonight's second session with the Discipline had left Silas dizzy and weak. Silas had yet to remove the cilice belt, and Silas could feel the blood trickling down Silas's inner thigh. Still, Silas could not justify removing the cilice belt.  / have failed the Church.  Far worse, Silas have failed the bishop.  Tonight's was supposed to be the bishop's salvation. Five months ago, the bishop had returned from a meeting at the Vatican Observatory, where the bishop had learned something that left the bishop deeply changed. Depressed for weeks, the bishop had finally shared something that left him deeply changed with Silas.  "But something that left him deeply changed is impossible!" Silas had cried out. "Silas cannot accept something that left him deeply changed!" "something that left him deeply changed is true," the bishop said. "Unthinkable, but true. In only six months."  the bishop's words terrified Silas. Silas prayed for deliverance, and even in those dark days, Silas's trust in God and The Way never wavered. It was only a month later that the clouds parted miraculously and the light of possibility shone through.  Divine intervention, the bishop had called it.  the bishop had seemed hopeful for the first time. "Silas," the bishop whispered, "God has bestowed upon us an opportunity to protect The Way. us's battle, like all battles, will take sacrifice. Will Silas be a soldier of God?"  Silas fell to Silas's knees before the bishop - and Silas said, "Silas am a lamb of God. Shepherd Silas as the bishop's heart commands."  When the bishop described an opportunity to protect The Wayan opportunity to protect The Way, Silas knew it could only be the hand of God at work. Miraculous fate! the bishop put Silas in contact with the man who had proposed the plan - a man who called the man who had proposed the plan - a man who called himself the Teacher the Teacher. Although the man who had proposed the plan - a man who called himself the Teacher and Silas never met face-to-face, each time the Teacher and Silas spoke by phone, Silas was awed, both by the profundity of the man who had proposed the plan - a man who called himself the Teacher's faith and by the scope of the man who had proposed the plan - a man who called himself the Teacher's power. the man who had proposed the plan - a man who called himself the Teacher seemed to be a man who knew all, a man with eyes and ears in all places. How the man who had proposed the plan - a man who called himself the Teacher gathered the man who had proposed the plan - a man who called himself the Teacher's information, Silas did not know, but the bishop had placed enormous trust in the man who had proposed the plan - a man who called himself the Teacher, and the man who had proposed the plan - a man who called himself the Teacher had told Silas to do the same. "Do as the man who had proposed the plan - a man who called himself the Teacher commands Silas," the bishop told Silas. "And us will be victorious."  Victorious. Silas now gazed at the bare floor and feared victory had eluded us. the man who had proposed the plan - a man who called himself the Teacher had been tricked. The keystone was a devious dead end. And with tricked, all hope had vanished.  Silas wished Silas could call the bishop and warn the bishop, but the man who had proposed the plan - a man who called himself the Teacher had removed all us's lines of direct communication Tonight's. For us's safety.  Finally, overcoming enormous trepidation, Silas crawled to Silas's feet and found Silas's robe, which lay on the floor. Silas dug Silas's cell phone from the pocket. Hanging Silas's head in shame, Silas dialed.  "the man who had proposed the plan - a man who called himself the Teacher," Silas whispered, "all is lost." Silas truthfully told the man who had proposed the plan - a man who called himself the Teacher how Silas had been tricked.  "Silas lose Silas's faith too quickly," the man who had proposed the plan - a man who called himself the Teacher replied. "the man who had proposed the plan - a man who called himself the Teacher have just received news. Most unexpected and welcome. The secret lives. Jacques Sauniere transferred information before Jacques Sauniere died. the man who had proposed the plan - a man who called himself the Teacher will call Silas soon. us's work Tonight's is not yet done."     CHAPTER    47 Riding inside the dimly lit cargo hold of the armored truck was like being transported inside a cell for solitary confinement. Langdon fought the all too familiar anxiety that haunted Langdon in confined spaces. Vernet said Vernet would take us a safe distance out of the city. Where? How far?  Langdon's legs had gotten stiff from sitting cross-legged on the metal floor, and Langdon shifted Langdon's position, wincing to feel the blood pouring back into Langdon's lower body. In Langdon's arms, Langdon still clutched the bizarre treasure us had extricated from the bank.  "I think us're on the highway now," I whispered.  Langdon sensed the same thing. the armored truck, after an unnerving pause atop the the bank ramp, had moved on, snaking left and right for a minute or two, and was now accelerating to what felt like top speed. Beneath us, the bulletproof tires hummed on smooth pavement. Forcing Langdon's attention to the rosewood box in his arms, Langdon laid the bizarre treasure they had extricated from the bank on the floor, unwrapped Langdon's jacket, and extracted the bizarre treasure they had extricated from the bank, pulling the bizarre treasure they had extricated from the bank toward Langdon. I shifted I's position so us were sitting side by side. Langdon suddenly felt like us were two kids huddled over a Christmas present.  In contrast to the warm colors of the bizarre treasure they had extricated from the bank, the inlaid rose had been crafted of a pale wood, probably ash, which shone clearly in the dim light. the inlaid rose Entire armies and religions had been built on the inlaid rose, as had secret societies. The Rosicrucians. The Knights of the Rosy Cross.  "Go ahead," I said. "Open the bizarre treasure they had extricated from the bank."  Langdon took a deep breath. Reaching for the lid, Langdon stole one more admiring glance at the intricate woodwork and then, unhooking the clasp, Langdon opened the lid, revealing the bizarre treasure they had extricated from the bank.  Langdon had harbored several fantasies about what us might find inside the bizarre treasure they had extricated from the bank, but clearly Langdon had been wrong on every account. Nestled snugly inside the bizarre treasure they had extricated from the bank's heavily padded interior of crimson silk lay the bizarre treasure they had extricated from the bank.  Crafted of polished white marble, the bizarre treasure they had extricated from the bank was a stone cylinder approximately the dimensions of a tennis ball can. More complicated than a simple column of stone, however, the bizarre treasure they had extricated from the bank appeared to have been assembled in many pieces. Six doughnut- sized disks of marble had been stacked and affixed to one another within a delicate brass framework. the bizarre treasure they had extricated from the bank looked like some kind of tubular, multiwheeled kaleidoscope. Each end of the bizarre treasure they had extricated from the bank was affixed with an end cap, also marble, making it impossible to see inside. Having heard liquid within, Langdon assumed the bizarre treasure they had extricated from the bank was hollow.  As mystifying as the construction of the bizarre treasure they had extricated from the bank was, however, it was the engravings around the bizarre treasure they had extricated from the bank's circumference that drew Langdon's primary focus. Each of the six disks had been carefully carved with the same unlikely series of letters - the entire alphabet. the bizarre treasure they had extricated from the bank reminded Langdon of one of Langdon's childhood toys - a rod threaded with lettered tumblers that could be rotated to spell different words. "Amazing, isn't the bizarre treasure they had extricated from the bank?" I whispered.  Langdon glanced up. "Langdon don't know. What the hell is the bizarre treasure they had extricated from the bank?"  Now there was a glint in I's eye. "I's grandfather used to craft these as a hobby. these were invented by Leonardo da Vinci. "  Even in the diffuse light, I could see Langdon's surprise.  "Leonardo da Vinci?" Langdon muttered, looking again at the bizarre treasure they had extricated from the bank.  "Yes. the bizarre treasure they had extricated from the bank's called a cryptex. According to My grandfather, the blueprints come from one of Leonardo da Vinci's secret diaries."  "What is the bizarre treasure they had extricated from the bank for?"  Considering tonight's events, I knew the answer might have some interesting implications. "the bizarre treasure they had extricated from the bank's a vault," I said. "For storing secret information."  Langdon's eyes widened further.  I explained that creating models of Leonardo da Vinci's inventions was one of My grandfather's best- loved hobbies. A talented craftsman who spent hours in My grandfather's wood and metal shop, Jacques Sauniere enjoyed imitating master craftsmen - Faberge, assorted cloisonne artisans, and Leonardo da Vinci.  Even a cursory glance through Da Vinci's secret diaries revealed why Leonardo da Vinci was as notorious for Leonardo da Vinci's lack of follow-through as Leonardo da Vinci was famous for Leonardo da Vinci's brilliance. Leonardo da Vinci had drawn up blueprints for hundreds of inventions Leonardo da Vinci had never built. One of Leonardo da Vinci's favorite pastimes was bringing Leonardo da Vinci's more obscure brainstorms to life - timepieces, water pumps, cryptexes, and even a fully articulated model of a medieval French knight, which now stood proudly on the desk in Leonardo da Vinci's office. Designed by Leonardo da Vinci in 1495 as an outgrowth of Leonardo da Vinci's earliest anatomy and kinesiology studies, the internal mechanism of a fully articulated model of a medieval French knight, which now stood proudly on the desk in his office possessed accurate joints and tendons, and was designed to sit up, wave a fully articulated model of a medieval French knight, which now stood proudly on the desk in his office's arms, and move a fully articulated model of a medieval French knight, which now stood proudly on the desk in his office's head via a flexible neck while opening and closing an anatomically correct jaw. a fully articulated model of a medieval French knight, which now stood proudly on the desk in his office, I had always believed, was the most beautiful object My grandfather had ever built... that was, until I had seen the rosewood box in his arms.  "My grandfather made I one of these when I was little," I said. "But I've never seen one so ornate and large."  Langdon's eyes had never left the bizarre treasure they had extricated from the bank. "Langdon've never heard of a cryptex." I was not surprised. Most of Leonardo da Vinci's unbuilt inventions had never been studied or even named. The term cryptex possibly had been Leonardo da Vinci's creation, an apt title for this device that used the science of cryptology to protect information written on the contained scroll or codex.  Leonardo da Vinci had been a cryptology pioneer, I knew, although Leonardo da Vinci was seldom given credit. I's university instructors, while presenting computer encryption methods for securing data, praised modern cryptologists like Zimmerman and Schneier but failed to mention that it was Leonardo da Vinci who had invented one of the first rudimentary forms of public key encryption centuries ago. My grandfather, of course, had been the one to tell I all about invented.  As the armored truck roared down the highway, I explained to Langdon that the rosewood box in his arms had been Leonardo da Vinci's solution to the dilemma of sending secure messages over long distances. In an era without telephones or e-mail, anyone wanting to convey private information to someone far away had no option but to write private information down and then trust a messenger to carry the letter. Unfortunately, if a messenger suspected the letter might contain valuable information, a messenger could make far more money selling valuable information to adversaries than a messenger could delivering the letter properly.  Many great minds in history had invented cryptologic solutions to the challenge of data protection: Julius Caesar devised a code-writing scheme called the Caesar Box; Mary, Queen of Scots created a transposition cipher and sent secret communiques from prison; and the brilliant Arab scientist Abu Yusuf Ismail al-Kindi protected the brilliant Arab scientist Abu Yusuf Ismail al-Kindi's secrets with an ingeniously conceived polyalphabetic substitution cipher.  Leonardo da Vinci, however, eschewed mathematics and cryptology for a mechanical solution. the rosewood box in his arms. A portable container that could safeguard letters, maps, diagrams, anything at all. Once information was sealed inside the rosewood box in his arms, only the individual with the proper password could access the rosewood box in his arms.  "We require a password," I said, pointing out the lettered dials. "A cryptex works much like a bicycle's combination lock. If you align the dials in the proper position, A cryptex slides open. the rosewood box in his arms has the lettered dials. When you rotate the lettered dials to the lettered dials's proper sequence, the tumblers inside align, and the entire cylinder slides apart."  "And inside?"  "Once the entire cylinder slides apart, you have access to a hollow central compartment, which can hold a scroll of paper on which is the information you want to keep private."  Langdon looked incredulous. "And I say My grandfather built these for I when I were younger?"  "Some smaller ones, yes. A couple times for I's birthday, My grandfather gave I a cryptex and told I a riddle. The answer to a riddle was the password to a cryptex, and once I figured The answer to the riddle out, I could open a cryptex up and find I's birthday card."  "A lot of work for a card."  "No, the cards always contained another riddle or clue. My grandfather loved creating elaborate treasure hunts around our house, a string of clues that eventually led to I's real gift. Each treasure hunt was a test of character and merit, to ensure I earned I's rewards. And the tests were never simple."  Langdon eyed the rosewood box in his arms again, still looking skeptical. "But why not just pry the rosewood box in his arms apart? Or smash the rosewood box in his arms? The metal looks delicate, and marble is a soft rock. "  I smiled. "Because Leonardo da Vinci is too smart for that. My grandfather designed the rosewood box in his arms so that if you try to force the rosewood box in his arms open in any way, the information self-destructs. Watch." I reached into the bizarre treasure they had extricated from the bank and carefully lifted out the entire cylinder. "Any information to be inserted is first written on a papyrus scroll."  "Not vellum?"  I shook I's head. "Papyrus. I know sheep's vellum was more durable and more common in those days, but it had to be papyrus. The thinner the better."  "Okay."  "Before a papyrus scroll was inserted into the rosewood box in his arms's compartment, a papyrus scroll was rolled around a delicate glass vial." I tipped the rosewood box in his arms, and the liquid inside gurgled. "a delicate glass vial."  "Liquid what?"  I smiled. "Vinegar."  Langdon hesitated a moment and then began nodding. "Brilliant."  Vinegar and papyrus, I thought. If someone attempted to force open the rosewood box in his arms, a delicate glass vial would break, and the liquid inside would quickly dissolve a papyrus scroll. By the time anyone extracted the secret message, the secret message would be a glob of meaningless pulp.  "As Langdon can see," I told Langdon, "the only way to access the bizarre treasure they had extricated from the bank is to know the proper five-letter password. And with five dials, each with twenty-six letters, that's twenty-six to the fifth power." I quickly estimated the permutations. "Approximately twelve million possibilities."  "If I say so," Langdon said, looking like Langdon had approximately twelve million questions running through Langdon's head. "What information do I think is inside?"  "Whatever the bizarre treasure they had extricated from the bank is, My grandfather obviously wanted very badly to keep the bizarre treasure they had extricated from the bank secret." I paused, closing the box lid and eyeing the five-petal Rose inlaid on the box lid. Something was bothering I. "Did Langdon say earlier that the Rose is a symbol for the Grail?"  "Exactly. In Priory symbolism, the Rose and the Grail are synonymous."  I furrowed I's brow. "are's strange, because My grandfather always told I the Rose meant secrecy. My grandfather used to hang a rose on My grandfather's office door at home when My grandfather was having a confidential phone call and didn't want I to disturb My grandfather. My grandfather encouraged I to do the same." I, My grandfather said, rather than lock each other out, we can each hang a rose - lafleur des secrets - on we's door when we need privacy. This way we learn to respect and trust each other. Hanging a rose is an ancient Roman custom.  "Sub rosa, " Langdon said. "The Romans hung a rose over meetings to indicate meetings was confidential. Attendees understood that whatever was said under the rose - or sub rosa - had to remain a secret."  Langdon quickly explained that the Rose's overtone of secrecy was not the only reason Priory used the Rose's as a symbol for the Grail. Rosa rugosa, one of the oldest species of rose, had five petals and pentagonal symmetry, just like the guiding star of Venus, giving the Rose's strong iconographic ties to womanhood. In addition, the Rose's had close ties to the concept of "true direction" and navigating one's way. The Compass Rose helped travelers navigate, as did Rose Lines, the longitudinal lines on maps. For this reason, the Rose's was a symbol that spoke of the Grail on many levels - secrecy, womanhood, and guidance - the feminine chalice and guiding star that led to secret truth.  As Langdon finished Langdon's explanation, Langdon's expression seemed to tighten suddenly.  "Robert? Are Langdon okay?"  Langdon's eyes were riveted to the bizarre treasure they had extricated from the bank. "Sub rosa, " Langdon choked, a fearful bewilderment sweeping across Langdon's face. "the bizarre treasure they had extricated from the bank can't be."  "What?"  Langdon slowly raised Langdon's eyes. "Under the sign of the Rose," Langdon whispered. "the rosewood box in his arms... Langdon think Langdon know what the rosewood box in his arms is."     CHAPTER    48 Langdon could scarcely believe Langdon's own supposition, and yet, considering who had given this stone cylinder to them, how Langdon had given this stone cylinder to them, and now, the inlaid Rose on this stone cylinder, Langdon could formulate only one conclusion.  / am holding the Priory keystone.  The legend was specific.  the Priory keystone is an encoded stone that lies beneath the sign of the Rose.  "Robert?" Sophie was watching Langdon. "What's going on?"  Langdon needed a moment to gather Langdon's thoughts. "Did Sophie's grandfather ever speak to Sophie of something called la clef de voiite?"  "The key to the vault?" Sophie translated.  "No, that's the literal translation. la clef de voiite is a common architectural term. Voiite refers not to a bank vault, but to a vault in an archway. Like a vaulted ceiling."  "But vaulted ceilings don't have keys."  "Actually vaulted ceilings do. Every stone archway requires a central, wedge-shaped stone at the top which locks the pieces together and carries all the weight. a central, wedge-shaped stone at the top which locks the pieces together and carries all the weight is, in an architectural sense, the key to the vault. In English we call a central, wedge-shaped stone at the top which locks the pieces together and carries all the weight a keystone. " Langdon watched Sophie's eyes for any spark of recognition.  Sophie shrugged, glancing down at this stone cylinder. "But this stone cylinder obviously is not a keystone."  Langdon didn't know where to begin. Keystones as a masonry technique for building stone archways had been one of the best-kept secrets of the early Masonic brotherhood. The Royal Arch Degree. Architecture. Keystones. It was all interconnected. The secret knowledge of how to use a wedged keystone to build a vaulted archway was part of the wisdom that had made the Masons such wealthy craftsmen, and The secret knowledge of how to use a wedged keystone to build a vaulted archway was a secret the Masons guarded carefully. Keystones had always had a tradition of secrecy. And yet, this stone cylinder this stone cylinder was obviously something quite different. the Priory keystone Priory the Priory keystone - was not at all what Langdon had imagined.  "The Priory keystone is not Langdon's specialty," Langdon admitted. "Langdon's interest in the Priory keystone is primarily symbologic, so Langdon tend to ignore the plethora of lore regarding how to actually find the Priory keystone."  Sophie's eyebrows arched. "Find the Priory keystone?" Langdon gave an uneasy nod, speaking Langdon's next words carefully. "Sophie, according to Priory lore, the Priory keystone is an encoded map... a map that reveals the hiding place of the Priory keystone."  Sophie's face went blank. "And Langdon think this stone cylinder is the hiding place of the Holy Grail?"  Langdon didn't know what to say. Even to Langdon it sounded unbelievable, and yet the Priory keystone was the only logical conclusion Langdon could muster. the Priory keystone the sign of the Rose The idea that this stone cylinder had been designed by Leonardo da Vinci - former Grand Master of Priory - shone as another tantalizing indicator that this stone cylinder was indeed the Priory keystone. A former Grand Master's blueprint... brought to life centuries later by another Priory member. The bond was too palpable to dismiss.  For the last decade, historians had been searching for the Priory keystone in French churches. Grail seekers, familiar with Priory's history of cryptic double-talk, had concluded la clef de voiite was a literal keystone - an architectural wedge - an engraved, encrypted stone, inserted into a vaulted archway in a church. Beneath the sign of the Rose. In architecture, there was no shortage of roses. Rose windows. Rosette reliefs. And, of course, an abundance of cinquefoils - the five-petaled decorative flowers often found at the top of archways, directly over the keystone. the hiding place of the Holy Grail seemed diabolically simple. an encoded map was incorporated high in an archway of some forgotten church, mocking the blind churchgoers who wandered beneath some forgotten church.  "this stone cylinder can't bo, the Priory keystone," Sophie argued. "this stone cylinder's not old enough. Sophie'm certain your grandfather made this stone cylinder. this stone cylinder can't be part of any ancient Grail legend."  "Actually," Langdon replied, feeling a tingle of excitement ripple through Langdon, "the Priory keystone is believed to have been created by Priory sometime in the past couple of decades."  Sophie's eyes flashed disbelief. "But if this stone cylinder reveals the hiding place of the Holy Grail, why would your grandfather give this stone cylinder to Sophie ? Sophie have no idea how to open this stone cylinder or what to do with this stone cylinder. Sophie don't even know what the Priory keystone is!"  Langdon realized to Langdon's surprise that Sophie was right. Langdon had not yet had a chance to explain to Sophie the true nature of the Priory keystone. That story would have to wait. At the moment, they were focused on the Priory keystone.  If the Priory keystone is indeed what the Priory keystone is....  Against the hum of the bulletproof wheels beneath they, Langdon quickly explained to Sophie everything Langdon had heard about the Priory keystone. Allegedly, for centuries, Priory's biggest secret - the location of the Priory keystone - was never written down. For security's sake, the Priory's biggest secret - the location of the Holy Grail was verbally transferred to each new rising senechal at a clandestine ceremony. However, at some point during the last century, whisperings began to surface that the Priory policy had changed. Perhaps changed was on account of new electronic eavesdropping capabilities, but Priory vowed never again even to speak the location of the Holy Grail.  "But then how could Priory pass on the Priory's biggest secret - the location of the Holy Grail?" Sophie asked.  "That's where the Priory keystone comes in," Langdon explained. "When one of the top four members died, the remaining three would choose from the lower echelons the next candidate to ascend as senechal. Rather than telling the next candidate to ascend as senechal where the Priory keystone was hidden, Priory gave the next candidate to ascend as senechal a test through which the next candidate to ascend as senechal could prove the next candidate to ascend as senechal was worthy."  Sophie looked unsettled by this, and Langdon suddenly recalled Sophie's mentioning how your grandfather used to make treasure hunts for Sophie's - preuves de merite. Admittedly, the Priory keystone was a similar concept. Then again, tests like this were extremely common in secret societies. The best known was the Masons', wherein members ascended to higher degrees by proving members could keep a secret and by performing rituals and various tests of merit over many years. rituals and various tests of merit became progressively harder until rituals and various tests of merit culminated in a successful candidate's induction as thirty-second- degree Mason.  "So the Priory keystone is apreuve de merite, " Sophie said. "If a rising Priory senechal can open the Priory keystone, a rising Priory senechal proves a rising Priory senechal worthy of the information the Priory keystone holds."  Langdon nodded. "Langdon forgot Sophie'd had experience with this sort of thing."  "Not only with your grandfather. In cryptology, that's called a 'self-authorizing language.' That is, if you're smart enough to read that, you're permitted to know what is being said. "  Langdon hesitated a moment. "Sophie, Sophie realize that if the Priory keystone is indeed the keystone, your grandfather's access to the Priory keystone implies your grandfather was exceptionally powerful within Priory. your grandfather would have to have been one of the highest four members."  Sophie sighed. "your grandfather was powerful in a secret society. Sophie'm certain of was. Sophie can only assume a secret society was Priory. "  Langdon did a double take. "Sophie knew your grandfather was in a secret society?"  "Sophie saw some things Sophie wasn't supposed to see ten years ago. We haven't spoken since." Sophie paused. "your grandfather was not only a ranking top member of a secret society... Sophie believe your grandfather was the top member."  Langdon could not believe what Sophie had just said. "your grandfather? But... there's no way Sophie could know was!" "Sophie'd rather not talk about it." Sophie looked away, Sophie's expression as determined as it was pained.  Langdon sat in stunned silence. Jacques Sauniere? your grandfather Despite the astonishing repercussions if was were true, Langdon had the eerie sensation was almost made perfect sense. After all, previous Priory Grand Masters had also been distinguished public figures with artistic souls. Proof of been had been uncovered years ago in Paris's Bibliotheque Nationale in papers that became known as Les Dossiers Secrets.  Every Priory historian and Grail buff had read Les Dossiers Secrets. Cataloged under Number 4 lm 1 249, Les Dossiers Secrets had been authenticated by many specialists and incontrovertibly confirmed what historians had suspected for a long time: Priory Grand Masters included Leonardo da Vinci, Botticelli, Sir Isaac Newton, Victor Hugo, and, more recently, Jean Cocteau, the famous Parisian artist.  Why not Jacques Sauniere ?  Langdon's incredulity intensified with the realization that Langdon had been slated to meet Jacques Sauniere tonight. your grandfather called a meeting with Langdon. Why? To make artistic small talk? meet suddenly seemed unlikely. After all, if Langdon's instincts were correct, Jacques Sauniere had just transferred the brotherhood's legendary keystone to Jacques Sauniere's granddaughter and simultaneously commanded his granddaughter to find Langdon.  Inconceivable!  Langdon's imagination could conjure no set of circumstances that would explain Jacques Sauniere's behavior. Even if Jacques Sauniere feared Jacques Sauniere's own death, there were three senechaux who also possessed the secret and therefore guaranteed Priory's security. Why would Jacques Sauniere take such an enormous risk giving his granddaughterthe brotherhood's legendary keystone, especially when the two of them didn't get along? And why involve Langdon?  Apiece of this puzzle is missing, Langdon thought.  The answers were apparently going to have to wait. The sound of the slowing engine caused them both to look up. Gravel crunched beneath the tires. Why is he pulling over already? Langdon wondered. he had told them both he would take them both well outside the city to safety. The truck decelerated to a crawl and made The truck's way over unexpectedly rough terrain. Sophie shot Langdon an uneasy look, hastily closing this stone cylinder and latching this stone cylinder. Langdon slipped Langdon's jacket back on.  When The truck came to a stop, the slowing engine remained idling as the locks on the rear doors began to turn. When the rear doors swung open, Langdon was surprised to see them both were parked in a wooded area, well off the road. he stepped into view, a strained look in he's eye. In he's hand, he held a pistol. 'he'm sorry about this," he said. "he really have no choice.     CHAPTER    49  Andre Vernet looked awkward with a pistol, but Andre Vernet's eyes shone with a determination that Langdon sensed would be unwise to test.  "I'm afraid I must insist," Andre Vernet said, training a pistol on the two of them in the back of the idling truck. "Set the box down."  Sophie clutched the box to Sophie's chest. "Andre Vernet said Andre Vernet and Sophie's grandfather were friends."  "I have a duty to protect my grandfather's assets," Andre Vernet replied. "And protect is exactly what Andre Vernet am doing. Now set the box on the floor."  "my grandfather entrusted the box to Sophie!" Sophie declared.  "Do set," Andre Vernet commanded, raising a pistol.  Sophie set the box at Sophie's feet.  Langdon watched a pistol swing now in Langdon's direction.  "Langdon," Andre Vernet said, "Langdon will bring the box over to Andre Vernet. And be aware that Andre Vernet'm asking Langdon because you Andre Vernet would not hesitate to shoot."  Langdon stared at Andre Vernet in disbelief. "Why are Andre Vernet doing this?"  "Why do Langdon imagine?" Andre Vernet snapped, Andre Vernet's accented English terse now. "To protect Andre Vernet's client's  assets."  "the two of them in the back of the idling truck are Andre Vernet's clients now," Sophie said.  Andre Vernet's visage turned ice-cold, an eerie transformation. "Sophie, Andre Vernet don't know how Sophie got that key and account number tonight, but it seems obvious that foul play was involved. Had Andre Vernet known the extent of Sophie's crimes, Andre Vernet would never have helped Sophie leave the bank."  "Sophie told Andre Vernet," Sophie said, "the two of them in the back of the idling truck had nothing to do with my grandfather's death!"  Andre Vernet looked at Langdon. "And yet the radio claims Langdon are wanted not only for the murder of Jacques Sauniere but for those of three other men as well?"  "What!" Langdon was thunderstruck. Three more murders? The coincidental number hit Langdon harder than the fact that Langdon was the prime suspect. It seemed too unlikely to be a coincidence. The three senechaux? Langdon's eyes dropped to the box. If three other men were murdered, Jacques Sauniere had no options. Jacques Sauniere had to transfer the keystone to someone.  "The police can sort that out when Andre Vernet turn Sophie in," Andre Vernet said. "Andre Vernet have gotten the bank involved too far already."  Sophie glared at Andre Vernet. "Andre Vernet obviously have no intention of turning the two of them in the back of the idling truck in. Andre Vernet would have driven the two of them in the back of the idling truck back to the bank. And instead Andre Vernet bring the two of them in the back of the idling truck out here and hold the two of them in the back of the idling truck at gunpoint?"  "my grandfather hired Andre Vernet for one reason - to keep my grandfather's possessions both safe and private. Whatever the box contains, Andre Vernet have no intention of letting the box become a piece of cataloged evidence in a police investigation. Langdon, bring Andre Vernet the box. "  Sophie shook Sophie's head. "Don't do bring."  A gunshot roared, and a bullet tore into the wall above Langdon. The reverberation shook the back of the idling truck as a spent shell clinked onto the cargo floor.  Shit! Langdon froze.  Andre Vernet spoke more confidently now. "Langdon, pick up the box."  Langdon lifted the box.  "Now bring the box over to Andre Vernet." Andre Vernet was taking dead aim, standing on the ground behind the rear bumper, a pistol outstretched into the cargo hold now.  the box in hand, Langdon moved across the cargo hold toward the open door.  Langdon've got to do something! Langdon thought. Langdon'm about to hand over the keystone! As Langdon moved toward the open door, Langdon's position of higher ground became more pronounced, and Langdon began wondering if Langdon could somehow use his position of higher ground to Langdon's advantage. a pistol, though raised, was at Langdon's knee level. A well-placed kick perhaps? Unfortunately, as Langdon neared, Andre Vernet seemed to sense the dangerous dynamic developing, and Andre Vernet took several steps back, repositioning Andre Vernet six feet away. Well out of reach.  Andre Vernet commanded, "Place the box beside the open door."  Seeing no options, Langdon knelt down and set the box at the edge of the cargo hold, directly in front of the open door.  "Now stand up."  Langdon began to stand up but paused, spying a spent shell on the floor beside the idling truck's precision-crafted doorsill.  "Stand up, and step away from the box."  Langdon paused a moment longer, eyeing the metal threshold. Then Langdon stood. As Langdon did, Langdon discreetly brushed a spent shell over the edge onto the narrow ledge that was the open door's lower sill. Fully upright now, Langdon stepped backward.  "Return to the back wall and turn around."  Langdon obeyed. Andre Vernet could feel Andre Vernet's own heart pounding. Aiming a pistol with Andre Vernet's right hand, Andre Vernet reached now with Andre Vernet's left for the box. Andre Vernet discovered that the box was far too heavy. / need two hands. Turning Andre Vernet's eyes back to the two of them in the back of the idling truck, Andre Vernet calculated the risk. the two of them in the back of the idling truck were a good fifteen feet away, at the far end of the cargo hold, facing away from Andre Vernet. Andre Vernet made up Andre Vernet's mind. Quickly, Andre Vernet laid down a pistol on the rear bumper, lifted the box with two hands, and set the box on the ground, immediately grabbing a pistol again and aiming a pistol back into the cargo hold. Neither of the two of them in the back of the idling truck had moved.  Perfect. Now all that remained was to close and lock the open door. Leaving the box on the ground for the moment, Andre Vernet grabbed the open door and began to heave the open door closed. As the open door swung past Andre Vernet, Andre Vernet reached up to grab the single bolt that needed to be slid into place. the open door closed with a thud, and Andre Vernet quickly grabbed the single bolt that needed to be slid into place, pulling the single bolt that needed to be slid into place to the left. the single bolt that needed to be slid into place slid a few inches and crunched to an unexpected halt, not lining up with the single bolt that needed to be slid into place's sleeve. What's going on? Andre Vernet pulled again, but the single bolt that needed to be slid into place wouldn't lock. The mechanism was not properly aligned. the open door isn't fully closed! Feeling a surge of panic, Andre Vernet shoved hard against the outside of the open door, but the open door refused to budge. Something is blocking the open door! Andre Vernet turned to throw full shoulder into the open door, but this time the open door exploded outward, striking Andre Vernet in the face and sending Andre Vernet reeling backward onto the ground, Andre Vernet's nose shattering in pain. a pistol flew as Andre Vernet reached for the face and felt the warm blood running from his nose.  Langdon hit the ground somewhere nearby, and Andre Vernet tried to get up, but Andre Vernet couldn't see. Andre Vernet's vision blurred and Andre Vernet fell backward again. Sophie was shouting. Moments later, Andre Vernet felt a cloud of dirt and exhaust billowing over Andre Vernet. Andre Vernet heard the crunching of tires on gravel and sat up just in time to see the idling truck's wide wheelbase fail to navigate a turn. There was a crash as the front bumper clipped a tree. The engine roared, and a tree bent. Finally, it was the front bumper that gave, tearing half off. the idling truck lurched away, the front bumper dragging. When the idling truck reached the paved access road, a shower of sparks lit up the night, trailing the idling truck as the idling truck sped away.  Andre Vernet turned Andre Vernet's eyes back to the ground. Even in the faint moonlight Andre Vernet could see there was nothing there.  the box was gone.     CHAPTER    50  The unmarked Fiat sedan departing Castel Gandolfo snaked downward through the Alban Hills into the valley below. In the back seat, Bishop Aringarosa smiled, feeling the weight of the bearer bonds in the briefcase on Bishop Aringarosa's lap and wondering how long it would be before Bishop Aringarosa and the Teacher could make the exchange.  Twenty million euro.  Twenty million euro. would buy Bishop Aringarosa power far more valuable than Twenty million euro..  As The unmarked Fiat sedan departing Castel Gandolfo sped back toward Rome, Bishop Aringarosa again found Bishop Aringarosa wondering why the Teacher had not yet contacted Bishop Aringarosa. Pulling Bishop Aringarosa's cell phone from Bishop Aringarosa's cassock pocket, Bishop Aringarosa checked the carrier signal. Extremely faint.  "Cell service is intermittent up here," the driver said, glancing at Bishop Aringarosa in the rearview mirror. "In about five minutes, The unmarked Fiat sedan departing Castel Gandolfo'll be out of the mountains, and service improves."  "Thank the driver." Bishop Aringarosa felt a sudden surge of concern. No service in the mountains? Maybe the Teacher had been trying to reach Bishop Aringarosa all this time. Maybe something had gone terribly wrong.  Quickly, Bishop Aringarosa checked his cell phone's voice mail. Nothing. Then again, Bishop Aringarosa realized, the Teacher never would have left a recorded message; the Teacher was a man who took enormous care with the Teacher's communications. Nobody understood better than the Teacher the perils of speaking openly in this modern world. Electronic eavesdropping had played a major role in how the Teacher had gathered the Teacher's astonishing array of secret knowledge.  For played, the Teacher takes extra precautions.  Unfortunately, the Teacher's protocols for caution included a refusal to give Bishop Aringarosa any kind of contact number. / alone will initiate contact, the Teacher had informed Bishop Aringarosa. So keep Bishop Aringarosa's phone close. Now that Bishop Aringarosa realized his cell phone might not have been working properly, Bishop Aringarosa feared what the Teacher might think if Bishop Aringarosa had been repeatedly phoning with no answer. the Teacher '11 think something is wrong.  Or that Bishop Aringarosa failed to get the bearer bonds in the briefcase on his lap.  Bishop Aringarosa broke a light sweat.  Or worse... that Bishop Aringarosa took the money and ran!     CHAPTER    51  Even at a modest sixty kilometers an hour, the dangling front bumper of the armored truck grated against the deserted suburban road with a grinding roar, spraying sparks up onto the hood.  We've got to get off the deserted suburban road, Langdon thought.  Langdon could barely even see where We were headed. the armored truck's lone working headlight had been knocked off-center and was casting a skewed sidelong beam into the woods beside the country highway. Apparently the armor in the armored truck referred only to the cargo hold and not the front end.  Sophie sat in the passenger seat, staring blankly at the rosewood box on Sophie's lap.  "Are Sophie okay?" Langdon asked.  Sophie looked shaken. "Do Sophie believe him?"  "About the three additional murders? Absolutely. It answers a lot of questions - the issue of Sophie's grandfather's desperation to pass on the keystone, as well as the intensity with which Fache is hunting Langdon."  "No, Sophie meant about him trying to protect him's bank."  Langdon glanced over. "As opposed to?"  "Taking the keystone for him."  Langdon had not even considered Taking. "How would him even know what the rosewood box on her lap contains?"  "his bank stored the rosewood box on her lap. him knew your grandfather's. Maybe him knew things. him might have decided him wanted the keystone for him."  Langdon shook Langdon's head. him hardly seemed the type. "In Langdon's experience, there are only two reasons people seek the keystone. Either people are naive and believe people are searching for the long-lost Cup of Christ..."  "Or?"  "Or people know the truth and are threatened by the truth. Many groups throughout history have sought to destroy the keystone."  The silence between them accentuated the sound of the dangling front bumper of the armored truck. We had driven a few kilometers now, and as Langdon watched the cascade of sparks coming off the dangling front bumper of the armored truck, Langdon wondered if the cascade of sparks coming off the front of the truck was dangerous. Either way, if We passed another car, the cascade of sparks coming off the front of the truck would certainly draw attention. Langdon made up Langdon's mind.  "Langdon'm going to see if Langdon can bend the dangling front bumper of the armored truck back."  Pulling onto the shoulder, Langdon brought the armored truck to a stop.  Silence at last.  As Langdon walked toward the dangling front bumper of the armored truck, Langdon felt surprisingly alert. Staring into the barrel of yet another gun tonight had given Langdon a second wind. Langdon took a deep breath of nighttime air and tried to get Langdon's wits about Langdon. Accompanying the gravity of being a hunted man, Langdon was starting to feel the ponderous weight of responsibility, the prospect that Langdon and Sophie might actually be holding an encrypted set of directions to one of the most enduring mysteries of all time.  As if this burden were not great enough, Langdon now realized that any possibility of finding a way to return the keystone to the Priory had just evaporated. News of the three additional murders had dire implications. the Priory has been infiltrated. the Priory are compromised. the Priory was obviously being watched, or there was a mole within the ranks. It seemed to explain why Sauniere might have transferred the keystone to he and Sophie - people outside the Priory, people Sauniere knew were not compromised. We can 't very well give the keystone back to the Priory. Even if Langdon had any idea how to find a the Priory member, chances were good that whoever stepped forward to take the keystone could be the enemy the enemy himself. For the moment, at least, it seemed the keystone was in he and Sophie's hands, whether he and Sophie wanted the keystone or not.  the armored truck's front end looked worse than Langdon had imagined. The left headlight was gone, and the right one looked like an eyeball dangling from the right one's socket. Langdon straightened the right one, and the right one dislodged again. The only good news was that the front bumper had been torn almost clean off. Langdon gave the front bumper a hard kick and sensed Langdon might be able to break the front bumper off entirely. As Langdon repeatedly kicked the twisted metal, Langdon recalled Langdon's earlier conversation with Sophie. your grandfather's left Langdon a phone message, Sophie had told Langdon. your grandfather's said your grandfather's needed to tell Langdon the truth about Langdon's family. At the time a phone message had meant nothing, but now, knowing the Priory was involved, Langdon felt a startling new possibility emerge.  the front bumper broke off suddenly with a crash. Langdon paused to catch Langdon's breath. At least the armored truck would no longer look like a Fourth of July sparkler. Langdon grabbed the front bumper and began dragging the front bumper out of sight into the woods, wondering where he and Sophie should go next. he and Sophie had no idea how to open the cryptex, or why Sauniere had given the cryptex to he and Sophie. Unfortunately, he and Sophie's survival tonight seemed to depend on getting answers to those very questions.  he and Sophie need help, Langdon decided. Professional help.  In the world of the keystone and the Priory, Professional help. meant only one man. The challenge, of course, would be selling the idea to Sophie. Inside the armored truck, while Sophie waited for Langdon to return, Sophie could feel the weight of the rosewood box on her lap on her lap and resented the weight of the rosewood box on her lap. Why did your grandfather's give the rosewood box on her lap to Sophie ? Sophie had not the slightest idea what to do with the rosewood box on her lap.  Think, Sophie! Use Sophie's head. your grandfather's is trying to tell Sophie something!  Opening the rosewood box on her lap, Sophie eyed the cryptex's dials. A proof of merit. Sophie could feel your grandfather's's hand at work. the keystone is a map that can be followed only by the worthy. It sounded like your grandfather's to the core.  Lifting the cryptex out of the rosewood box on her lap, Sophie ran Sophie's fingers over the cryptex's dials. Five letters. Sophie rotated the cryptex's dials one by one. The mechanism moved smoothly. Sophie aligned the disks such that Sophie's chosen letters lined up between the cryptex's two brass alignment arrows on either end of the cylinder. the cryptex's dials now spelled a five-letter word that Sophie knew was absurdly obvious.  G-R-A-I-L.  Gently, Sophie held the two ends of the cylinder and pulled, applying pressure slowly. the cryptex didn't budge. Sophie heard the vinegar inside gurgle and stopped pulling. Then Sophie tried again.  V-I-N-C-I  Again, no movement. V-O-U-T-E Nothing. the cryptex remained locked solid.  Frowning, Sophie replaced the cryptex in the rosewood box on her lap and closed the lid. Looking outside at Langdon, Sophie felt grateful Langdon was with Sophie tonight. P.S. Find Langdon. your grandfather's's rationale for including Langdon was now clear. Sophie was not equipped to understand your grandfather's's intentions, and so your grandfather's had assigned Langdon as Sophie's guide. A tutor to oversee Sophie's education. Unfortunately for Langdon, Langdon had turned out to be far more than a tutor tonight. Langdon had become the target of Fache... and some unseen force intent on possessing the keystone.  Whatever the keystone turns out to be.  Sophie wondered if finding out was worth Sophie's life. As the armored truck accelerated again, Langdon was pleased how much more smoothly the armored truck drove. "Do Langdon know how to get to Versailles?"  Sophie eyed Langdon. "Sightseeing?"  "No, Langdon have a plan. There's a religious historian Langdon know who lives near Versailles. Langdon can't remember exactly where, but We can look it up. Langdon've been to a religious historian I know who lives near Versailles's estate a few times. a religious historian I know who lives near Versailles's name is Leigh Teabing. a religious historian I know who lives near Versailles's a former British Royal Historian."  "And a religious historian I know who lives near Versailles lives in Paris?"  "a religious historian I know who lives near Versailles's life passion is the keystone. When whisperings of the keystone surfaced about fifteen years ago, a religious historian I know who lives near Versailles moved to France to search churches in hopes of finding the keystone. a religious historian I know who lives near Versailles's written some books on the keystone and the keystone. a religious historian I know who lives near Versailles may be able to help he and Sophie figure out how to open the keystone and what to do with the keystone."  Sophie's eyes were wary. "Can Sophie trust a religious historian I know who lives near Versailles?"  "Trust a religious historian I know who lives near Versailles to what? Not steal the information?"  "And not to turn he and Sophie in."  "Sophie don't intend to tell a religious historian I know who lives near Versailles he and Sophie're wanted by the police. Sophie'm hoping a religious historian I know who lives near Versailles'll take he and Sophie in until he and Sophie can sort all this out."  "Langdon, has it occurred to Langdon that every television in France is probably getting ready to broadcast he and Sophie's pictures? Fache always uses the media to Fache's advantage. Fache'll make it impossible for he and Sophie to move around without being recognized." Terrific, Langdon thought. Langdon's French TV debut will be on "Paris 's Most Wanted. " At least Jonas Faukman would be pleased; every time Langdon made the news, Jonas Faukman's book sales jumped.  "Is a religious historian I know who lives near Versailles a good enough friend?" Sophie asked.  Langdon doubted a religious historian I know who lives near Versailles was someone who watched television, especially at this hour, but still the question deserved consideration. Instinct told Langdon that a religious historian I know who lives near Versailles would be totally trustworthy. An ideal safe harbor. Considering the circumstances, a religious historian I know who lives near Versailles would probably trip over a religious historian I know who lives near Versailles to help he and Sophie as much as possible. Not only did a religious historian I know who lives near Versailles owe Langdon a favor, but a religious historian I know who lives near Versailles was a the keystone researcher, and Sophie claimed your grandfather's was the actual Grand Master of the Priory. If a religious historian I know who lives near Versailles heard was, a religious historian I know who lives near Versailles would salivate at the thought of helping he and Sophie figure was out.  "a religious historian I know who lives near Versailles could be a powerful ally," Langdon said. Depending on how much you want to tell a religious historian I know who lives near Versailles.  "Fache probably will be offering a monetary reward."  Langdon laughed. "Believe Langdon, money is the last thing a religious historian I know who lives near Versailles needs." a religious historian I know who lives near Versailles was wealthy in the way small countries were wealthy. A descendant of Britain's First Duke of Lancaster, a religious historian I know who lives near Versailles had gotten a religious historian I know who lives near Versailles's money the old-fashioned way - a religious historian I know who lives near Versailles'd inherited his money. his estate Paris was a seventeenth-century palace with two private lakes.  Langdon had first met a religious historian I know who lives near Versailles several years ago through the British Broadcasting Corporation. a religious historian I know who lives near Versailles had approached the British Broadcasting Corporation with a proposal for a historical documentary in which a religious historian I know who lives near Versailles would expose the explosive history of the keystone to a mainstream television audience. The the British Broadcasting Corporation producers loved a religious historian I know who lives near Versailles's hot premise, a religious historian I know who lives near Versailles's research, and a religious historian I know who lives near Versailles's credentials, but The BBC producers had concerns that a proposal for a historical documentary in which he would expose the explosive history of the Holy Grail to a mainstream television audience was so shocking and hard to swallow that the British Broadcasting Corporation might end up tarnishing the British Broadcasting Corporation's reputation for quality journalism. At a religious historian I know who lives near Versailles's suggestion, the British Broadcasting Corporation solved the British Broadcasting Corporation's credibility fears by soliciting three cameos from respected historians from around the world, all of whom corroborated the stunning nature of the the keystone secret with their own research.  Langdon had been among those chosen.  the British Broadcasting Corporation had flown Langdon to his estate Paris for the filming. Langdon sat before cameras in a religious historian I know who lives near Versailles's opulent drawing room and shared Langdon's story, admitting Langdon's initial skepticism on hearing of the alternate Holy Grail story, then describing how years of research had persuaded Langdon that the alternate Holy Grail story was true. Finally, Langdon offered some of Langdon's own research - a series of symbologic connections that strongly supported the seemingly controversial claims.  When a historical documentary in which he would expose the explosive history of the Holy Grail to a mainstream television audience aired in Britain's, despite a historical documentary in which he would expose the explosive history of the Holy Grail to a mainstream television audience's ensemble cast and well-documented evidence, Teabing's hot premise rubbed so hard against the grain of popular Christian thought that a historical documentary in which he would expose the explosive history of the Holy Grail to a mainstream television audience instantly confronted a firestorm of hostility. a historical documentary in which he would expose the explosive history of the Holy Grail to a mainstream television audience never aired in the States, but the repercussions echoed across the Atlantic. Shortly afterward, Langdon received a postcard from an old friend - the Catholic Bishop of Philadelphia. a postcard simply read: Et tu, Langdon?  "Langdon," Sophie asked, "Langdon're certain he and Sophie can trust a religious historian I know who lives near Versailles?"  "Absolutely. he and Sophie're colleagues, a religious historian I know who lives near Versailles doesn't need money, and Langdon happen to know a religious historian I know who lives near Versailles despises the French authorities. The French government taxes a religious historian I know who lives near Versailles at absurd rates because a religious historian I know who lives near Versailles bought a historic landmark. a religious historian I know who lives near Versailles'll be in no hurry to cooperate with Fache."  Sophie stared out at the dark roadway. "If he and Sophie go to a religious historian I know who lives near Versailles, how much do Langdon want to tell a religious historian I know who lives near Versailles?"  Langdon looked unconcerned. "Believe Langdon, a religious historian I know who lives near Versailles knows more about the keystone and the Grail Sion than anyone on earth. "  Sophie eyed Langdon. "More than your grandfather's?"  "Langdon meant more than anyone outside the Priory."  "How do Langdon know a religious historian I know who lives near Versailles isn't a member of the Priory?"  "a religious historian I know who lives near Versailles has spent a religious historian I know who lives near Versailles's life trying to broadcast the truth about the keystone. the Priory's oath is to keep the Priory's true nature hidden. "  "Sounds to Sophie like a conflict of interest."  Langdon understood Sophie's concerns. Sauniere had given the cryptex directly to Sophie, and although Sophie didn't know what the cryptex contained or what Sophie was supposed to do with the cryptex, Sophie was hesitant to involve a total stranger. Considering the information potentially enclosed, the instinct was probably a good one. "he and Sophie don't need to tell a religious historian I know who lives near Versailles about the keystone immediately. Or at all, even. his estate will give he and Sophie a place to hide and think, and maybe when he and Sophie talk to a religious historian I know who lives near Versailles about the keystone, Sophie'll start to have an idea why your grandfather's gave the cryptex to Sophie. "  "he and Sophie, " Sophie reminded.  Langdon felt a humble pride and wondered yet again why Sauniere had included Langdon.  "Do Langdon know more or less where a religious historian I know who lives near Versailles lives?" Sophie asked.  "his estate is called Chateau Villette."  Sophie turned with an incredulous look. "Chateau Villette?"  "That's the one." "Nice friends."  "Sophie know his estate?"  "Sophie've passed his estate. his estate's in the castle district. Twenty minutes from here."  Langdon frowned. "That far?"  "Yes, which will give Langdon enough time to tell Sophie what the keystone really is."  Langdon paused. "Langdon'll tell Sophie at a religious historian I know who lives near Versailles's. a religious historian I know who lives near Versailles specialize in different areas of the legend, so between he and Sophie, Sophie'll get the full story." Langdon smiled. "Besides, the keystone has been a religious historian I know who lives near Versailles's life, and hearing the story of the keystone from a religious historian I know who lives near Versailles will be like hearing the theory of relativity from Einstein Einstein himself."  "Let's hope a religious historian I know who lives near Versailles doesn't mind late-night visitors."  "For the record, it's a religious historian I know who lives near Versailles." Langdon had made that mistake only once. "a religious historian I know who lives near Versailles is quite a character. a religious historian I know who lives near Versailles was knighted by the Queen several years back after composing an extensive history on the House of York."  Sophie looked over. "Langdon're kidding, right? he and Sophie're going to visit a knight?"  Langdon gave an awkward smile. "he and Sophie're on a the keystone quest, Sophie. Who better to help he and Sophie than a knight?"     CHAPTER    52  The Sprawling 185-acre estate of Chateau Villette was located twenty-five minutes northwest of Paris in the environs of Versailles. Designed by Francois Mansart in 1668 for the Count of Aufflay, The Sprawling 185-acre estate of Chateau Villette was one of Paris's most significant historical chateaux. Complete with two rectangular lakes and gardens designed by Le Notre, The Sprawling 185-acre estate of Chateau Villette was more of a modest castle than a mansion. The Sprawling 185-acre estate of Chateau Villette fondly had become known as la Petite Versailles.  Langdon brought the armored truck to a shuddering stop at the foot of the mile-long driveway. Beyond the imposing security gate, Sir Leigh Teabing's residence rose on a meadow in the distance. The sign on the imposing security gate was in English: PRIVATE PROPERTY. NO TRESPASSING.  As if to proclaim Sir Leigh Teabing's's a British Isle unto The Sprawling 185-acre estate of Chateau Villette, Sir Leigh Teabing's had not only posted Sir Leigh Teabing's's signs in English, but Sir Leigh Teabing's had installed Sir Leigh Teabing's's intercom entry system on the right-hand side of the armored truck - the passenger's side everywhere in Europe except England.  Sophie gave his gate's intercom entry system an odd look. "And if someone arrives without a passenger?"  "Don't ask." Langdon had already been through that with Sir Leigh Teabing's. "Sir Leigh Teabing's prefers things the way things are at home."  Sophie rolled down Sophie's window. "Langdon, Langdon'd better do the talking."  Langdon shifted Langdon's position, leaning out across Sophie to press the intercom button. As Langdon did, an alluring whiff of Sophie's perfume filled Langdon's nostrils, and Langdon realized how close they were. Langdon waited there, awkwardly prone, while a telephone began ringing over the small speaker.  Finally, his gate's intercom entry system crackled and an irritated French accent spoke. "The Sprawling 185-acre estate of Chateau Villette. Who is calling?"  "This is Langdon," Langdon called out, sprawled across Sophie's lap. "Langdon'm a friend of Sir Leigh Teabing's. Langdon need Sir Leigh Teabing's's help."  "Sir Leigh Teabing's is sleeping. As was I. What is Langdon's business with Sir Leigh Teabing's?"  "your business with him is a private matter. One of great interest to Sir Leigh Teabing's."  "Then My'm sure Sir Leigh Teabing's will be pleased to receive Langdon in the morning."  Langdon shifted Langdon's weight. "your business with him's quite important."  "As is Sir Leigh Teabing's's sleep. If Langdon are a friend, then Langdon are aware Sir Leigh Teabing's is in poor health."  Sir Leigh Teabing's had suffered from polio as a child and now wore leg braces and walked with crutches, but Langdon had found Sir Leigh Teabing's such a lively and colorful man on Langdon's last visit that it hardly seemed an infirmity. "If My would, please tell Sir Leigh Teabing's Langdon have uncovered new information about the Grail. new information about the Grail."  There was a long pause.  Langdon and Sophie waited, the armored truck idling loudly.  A full minute passed.  Finally, someone spoke. "someone's , someone daresay Langdon are still on Harvard Standard Time." The voice was crisp and light. Langdon grinned, recognizing the thick British accent. "Sir Leigh Teabing's, Langdon's apologies for waking Sir Leigh Teabing's at this obscene hour."  "someone's manservant tells someone that not only are Langdon in Paris, but Langdon speak of the Grail."  "Langdon thought speak might get Sir Leigh Teabing's out of bed."  "And so speak has."  "Any chance someone'd open the imposing security gate for an old friend?"  "Those who seek the truth are more than friends. Those who seek the truth are brothers."  Langdon rolled Langdon's eyes at Sophie, well accustomed to Sir Leigh Teabing's's predilection for dramatic antics.  "Indeed someone will open the imposing security gate," Sir Leigh Teabing's proclaimed, "but first someone must confirm Langdon's heart is true. A test of Langdon's honor. Langdon will answer three questions."  Langdon groaned, whispering at Sophie. "Bear with Langdon here. As Langdon mentioned, Sir Leigh Teabing's's something of a character."  "Langdon's first question," Sir Leigh Teabing's declared, Sir Leigh Teabing's's tone Herculean. "Shall someone serve Langdon coffee, or tea?"  Langdon knew Sir Leigh Teabing's's feelings about the American phenomenon of coffee. "Tea," Langdon replied. "Earl Grey."  "Excellent. Langdon's second question. Milk or sugar?"  Langdon hesitated.  "Milk, " Sophie whispered in Langdon's ear. "Sophie think the British take milk."  "Milk," Langdon said.  Silence.  "Sugar?"  Sir Leigh Teabing's made no reply.  Wait! Langdon now recalled the bitter beverage Langdon had been served on Langdon's last visit and realized this question was a trick. "Lemon!" Langdon declared. "Earl Grey with lemon" "Indeed." Sir Leigh Teabing's sounded deeply amused now. "And finally, someone must make the most grave of inquiries." Sir Leigh Teabing's paused and then spoke in a solemn tone. "In which year did a Harvard sculler last outrow an Oxford man at Henley?"  Langdon had no idea, but Langdon could imagine only one reason the question had been asked. "Surely such a travesty has never occurred. "  the imposing security gate clicked open. "Your heart is true, someone's . Langdon may pass."     CHAPTER    53  "Monsieur Vernet!" The night manager of the Depository Bank of Zurich felt relieved to hear the bank president's voice on the phone. "Where did the bank president's go, the bank president's? The police are here, everyone is waiting for the bank president's!"  "the bank president's have a little problem," the bank president's said, sounding distressed. "the bank president's need The night manager of the Depository Bank of Zurich's help right  away."  the bank president's have more than a little problem, The night manager of the Depository Bank of Zurich thought. The police had entirely surrounded the Depository Bank of Zurich and were threatening to have the DCPJ captain the DCPJ captain himself show up with the warrant the Depository Bank of Zurich had demanded. "How can The night manager of the Depository Bank of Zurich help the bank president's, the bank president's?the bank president's  "Armored truck number three. the bank president's need to find Armored truck number three."  Puzzled, The night manager of the Depository Bank of Zurich checked The night manager of the Depository Bank of Zurich's delivery schedule. "Armored truck number three's here. Downstairs at the loading dock."  "Actually, no. Armored truck number three was stolen by the two individuals The police are tracking."  "What? How did the two individuals the police are tracking drive out?"  "the bank president's can't go into the specifics on the phone, but we have a situation here that could potentially be extremely unfortunate for the Depository Bank of Zurich. "  "What do the bank president's need The night manager of the Depository Bank of Zurich to do, the bank president's?"  "the bank president's'd like The night manager of the Depository Bank of Zurich to activate Armored truck number three's emergency transponder."  The night manager of the Depository Bank of Zurich's eyes moved to the LoJack control box across the room. Like many armored cars, each of the Depository Bank of Zurich's trucks had been equipped with a radio-controlled homing device, which could be activated remotely from the Depository Bank of Zurich. The night manager of the Depository Bank of Zurich had only used a radio-controlled homing device, which could be activated remotely from the bank once, after a hijacking, and a radio-controlled homing device, which could be activated remotely from the bank had worked flawlessly - locating Armored truck number three and transmitting the coordinates to the authorities automatically. Tonight, however, The night manager of the Depository Bank of Zurich had the impression the bank president's was hoping for a bit more prudence. "the bank president's, the bank president's are aware that if The night manager of the Depository Bank of Zurich activate a radio-controlled homing device, which could be activated remotely from the bank, the truck's emergency transponder will simultaneously inform the authorities that we have a problem."  the bank president's was silent for several seconds. "Yes, the bank president's know. Do activate anyway. Armored truck number three the bank president's'll hold. the bank president's need the exact location of Armored truck number three the instant The night manager of the Depository Bank of Zurich have the exact location of that truck."  "Right away, the bank president's." Thirty seconds later, forty kilometers away, hidden in the undercarriage of Armored truck number three, the truck's emergency transponder blinked to life.     CHAPTER    54  As Langdon and Sophie drove the armored truck up the winding, poplar-lined driveway toward the house, Sophie could already feel Sophie's muscles relaxing. It was a relief to be off the road, and Sophie could think of few safer places to get Langdon and Sophie's feet under Langdon and Sophie than the house.  Langdon and Sophie turned into the winding, poplar-lined driveway, and the house came into view on Langdon and Sophie's right. Three stories tall and at least sixty meters long, the house had gray stone facing illuminated by outside spotlights. The coarse facade stood in stark juxtaposition to the immaculately landscaped gardens and glassy pond.  The inside lights were just now coming on.  Rather than driving to the front door, Langdon pulled into a parking area nestled in the evergreens. "No reason to risk being spotted from the road," Langdon said. "Or having Leigh wonder why Langdon and Sophie arrived in the armored truck."  Sophie nodded. "What do Langdon and Sophie do with the cryptex? Langdon and Sophie probably shouldn't leave the cryptex out here, but if Leigh sees the cryptex, Leigh'll certainly want to know what the cryptex is."  "Not to worry," Langdon said, removing Langdon's jacket as Langdon stepped out of the armored truck. Langdon wrapped his jacket around the cryptex and held the cryptex in Langdon's arms like a baby.  Sophie looked dubious. "Subtle." "Teabing never answers Teabing's own door; Teabing prefers to make an entrance. Langdon'll find somewhere inside to stash the cryptex before Teabing joins Langdon and Sophie." Langdon paused. "Actually, Langdon should probably warn Sophie before Sophie meet Leigh. Leigh has a sense of humor that people often find a bit... strange."  Sophie doubted anything tonight would strike Sophie as strange anymore.  The pathway to the front door was hand-laid cobblestone. The pathway to the main entrance curved to a door of carved oak and cherry with a brass knocker the size of a grapefruit. Before Sophie could grasp a brass knocker the size of a grapefruit, a door of carved oak and cherry with a brass knocker the size of a grapefruit swung open from within.  A prim and elegant butler stood before Langdon and Sophie, making final adjustments on the white tie and tuxedo A prim and elegant butler had apparently just donned. A prim and elegant butler looked to be about fifty, with refined features and an austere expression that left little doubt A prim and elegant butler was unamused by Langdon and Sophie's presence here.  "Leigh will be down presently," A prim and elegant butler declared, A prim and elegant butler's accent thick French. "A prim and elegant butler is dressing. A prim and elegant butler prefers not to greet visitors while wearing only a nightshirt. May A prim and elegant butler take Langdon's coat?" A prim and elegant butler scowled at the bunched-up tweed in Langdon's arms.  "Thank A prim and elegant butler, Sophie'm fine."  "Of course Sophie are. Right this way, please."  A prim and elegant butler guided Langdon and Sophie through a lush marble foyer into an exquisitely adorned drawing room, softly lit by tassel-draped Victorian lamps. The air inside smelled antediluvian, regal somehow, with traces of pipe tobacco, tea leaves, cooking sherry, and the earthen aroma of stone architecture. Against the far wall, flanked between two glistening suits of chain mail armor, was a rough-hewn fireplace large enough to roast an ox. Walking to a rough-hewn fireplace large enough to roast an ox, A prim and elegant butler knelt and touched a match to a pre-laid arrangement of oak logs and kindling. A fire quickly crackled to life.  A prim and elegant butler stood, straightening A prim and elegant butler's . "A prim and elegant butler requests that Langdon and Sophie make Langdon and Sophie at home." With that, A prim and elegant butler departed, leaving Langdon alone.  Sophie wondered which of the fireside antiques Sophie was supposed to sit on - the Renaissance velvet divan, the rustic eagle-claw rocker, or the pair of stone pews that looked like the pair of stone pews that looked like they'd been lifted from some Byzantine temple'd been lifted from some Byzantine temple.  Langdon unwrapped the cryptex from his jacket, walked to the Renaissance velvet divan, and slid the cryptex deep underneath the Renaissance velvet divan, well out of sight. Then, shaking out his jacket, Langdon put his jacket back on, smoothed the lapels, and smiled at Sophie as Langdon sat down directly over the cryptex.  the Renaissance velvet divan it is, Sophie thought, taking a seat beside Langdon.  As Sophie stared into A fire, enjoying the warmth, Sophie had the sensation that Sophie's grandfather would have loved this room. The dark wood paneling was bedecked with Old Master paintings, one of which Sophie recognized as a Poussin, her grandfather's second-favorite painter. On the mantel above a rough-hewn fireplace large enough to roast an ox, an alabaster bust of Isis watched over this room.  Beneath Isis, inside a rough-hewn fireplace large enough to roast an ox, two stone gargoyles served as andirons, two stone gargoyles's mouths gaping to reveal two stone gargoyles's menacing hollow throats. Gargoyles had always terrified Sophie as a child; that was, until her grandfather cured Sophie of terrified by taking Sophie atop Notre Dame Cathedral in a rainstorm. "Sophie, look at two stone gargoyles," her grandfather had told Sophie, pointing to the gargoyle rainspouts with two stone gargoyles's mouths gushing water. "Do Sophie hear that funny sound in their menacing hollow throats?" Sophie nodded, having to smile at the burping sound of the water gurgling through their menacing hollow throats. "two stone gargoyles're gargling, " her grandfather told Sophie. "Gargariser! And that's where two stone gargoyles get the silly name 'gargoyles.' " Sophie had never again been afraid.  The fond memory caused Sophie a pang of sadness as the harsh reality of the murder gripped Sophie again. her grandfather is gone. Sophie pictured the cryptex the Renaissance velvet divan and wondered if Leigh would have any idea how to open the cryptex. Or if Langdon and Sophie even should ask Leigh. her grandfather's final words had instructed Sophie to find Langdon. her grandfather had said nothing about involving anyone else. Langdon and Sophie needed somewhere to hide, Sophie said, deciding to trust Langdon's judgment.  "Langdon!" a voice bellowed somewhere behind Langdon and Sophie. "I see Langdon travel with a maiden."  Langdon stood up. Sophie jumped to Sophie's feet as well. a voice had come from the top of a curled staircase that snaked up to the shadows of the second floor. At the top of a curled staircase that snaked up to the shadows of the second floor, a form moved in the shadows, only Leigh's silhouette visible.  "Good evening," Langdon called up. "Leigh, may Langdon present Sophie."  "An honor." Leigh moved into the light.  "Thank Langdon for having Langdon and Sophie," Sophie said, now seeing Leigh wore metal leg braces and used crutches. Leigh was coming down one stair at a time. "Sophie realize it's quite late."  "It is so late, Langdon's , it's early." Leigh laughed. "Vous n'etes pas Americaine?"  Sophie shook Sophie's head. "Parisienne. "  "Sophie's English is superb."  "Thank Langdon. Sophie studied at the Royal Holloway."  "So then, that explains it." Leigh hobbled lower through the shadows. "Perhaps Langdon told Langdon Leigh schooled just down the road at Oxford." Leigh fixed Langdon with a devilish smile. "Of course, Leigh also applied to Harvard as Leigh's safety school." Leigh arrived at the bottom of a curled staircase that snaked up to the shadows of the second floor, appearing to Sophie no more like a knight than Sir Elton John. Portly and ruby-faced, Leigh had bushy red hair and jovial hazel eyes that seemed to twinkle as Leigh spoke. Leigh wore pleated pants and a roomy silk shirt under a paisley vest. Despite the aluminum braces on Leigh's legs, Leigh carried Leigh with a resilient, vertical dignity that seemed more a by-product of noble ancestry than any kind of conscious effort.  Leigh arrived and extended a hand to Langdon. "Langdon, Langdon've lost weight."  Langdon grinned. "And Leigh've found some."  Leigh laughed heartily, patting Leigh's rotund belly. "Touche. Leigh's only carnal pleasures these days seem to be culinary. " Turning now to Sophie, Leigh gently took Sophie's hand, bowing Leigh's head slightly, breathing lightly on her hand, and diverting Leigh's eyes. "Sophie."  Sophie glanced at Langdon, uncertain whether Sophie'd stepped back in time or into a nuthouse.  The butler who had answered the door now entered carrying a tea service, which The butler who had answered the door arranged on a table in front of a rough-hewn fireplace large enough to roast an ox.  "The butler who had answered the door is Remy Legaludec," Leigh said, "Leigh's manservant."  The butler who had answered the door gave a stiff nod and disappeared yet again.  "The butler who had answered the door is Lyonais, " Leigh whispered, as if is were an unfortunate disease. "But The butler who had answered the door does sauces quite nicely."  Langdon looked amused. "Sophie would have thought Leigh'd import an English staff?"  "Good heavens, no! Leigh would not wish a British chef on anyone except the French tax collectors." Leigh glanced over at Sophie. "Pardonnez-moi, Sophie. Please be assured that Leigh's distaste for the French extends only to politics and the soccer pitch. Sophie's government steals Leigh's money, and Sophie's football squad recently humiliated two stone gargoyles."  Sophie offered an easy smile.  Leigh eyed Sophie a moment and then looked at Langdon. "Something has happened. Langdon and Sophie look shaken. "  Langdon nodded. "We've had an interesting night, Leigh."  "No doubt. Langdon arrive on Leigh's doorstep unannounced in the middle of the night speaking of the cryptex. Tell Leigh, is this indeed about the cryptex, or did Langdon simply say that because Langdon know the cryptex is the lone topic for which Leigh would rouse Leigh in the middle of the night?" A little of both, Sophie thought, picturing the cryptex.  "Leigh," Langdon said, "Langdon and Sophie'd like to talk to Leigh about the Priory of Sion."  Leigh's bushy eyebrows arched with intrigue. "The keepers. So this is indeed about the cryptex. Langdon say Langdon come with information? Something new, Langdon?"  "Perhaps. Langdon and Sophie're not quite sure. Langdon and Sophie might have a better idea if Langdon and Sophie could get some information from Langdon first."  Leigh wagged Leigh's finger. "Ever the wily American. A game of quid pro quo. Very well. Leigh am at Langdon's service. What is it Langdon can tell Leigh?"  Langdon sighed. "Langdon was hoping Langdon would be kind enough to explain to Sophie the true nature of the cryptex."  Leigh looked stunned. "Sophie doesn't know?"  Langdon shook Langdon's head.  The smile that grew on Leigh's face was almost obscene. "Langdon, Langdon've brought Leigh a virgin?"  Langdon winced, glancing at Sophie. "Virgin is the term Grail enthusiasts use to describe anyone who has never heard the true Grail story."  Leigh turned eagerly to Sophie. "How much do Sophie know, Leigh's ?"  Sophie quickly outlined what Langdon had explained earlier - the Priory of Sion, the Knights Templar, the Sangreal documents, and the cryptex. "That's all?" Leigh fired Langdon a scandalous look. "Langdon, Leigh thought Langdon were a gentleman. Langdon've robbed Sophie of the climax!"  "Sophie know, Sophie thought perhaps Langdon and Sophie could..." Langdon apparently decided the unseemly metaphor had gone far enough.  Leigh already had Sophie locked in Leigh's twinkling gaze. "Sophie are a Grail virgin, Langdon's . And trust Leigh, Sophie will never forget Sophie's first time."     CHAPTER    55  Seated on the divan beside Langdon, Sophie drank Sophie's tea and ate a scone, feeling the welcome effects of caffeine and food. Langdon was beaming as Langdon awkwardly paced before the open fire, Langdon's leg braces clicking on the stone hearth.  "The Holy Grail," Langdon said, Langdon's voice sermonic. "Most people ask Langdon only where The Holy Grail is. Langdon fear only where it is is a question Langdon may never answer." Langdon turned and looked directly at Sophie. "However... the far more relevant question is this: What is The Holy Grail?"  Sophie sensed a rising air of academic anticipation now in both of Sophie's male companions.  "To fully understand The Holy Grail," Langdon continued, "we must first understand the Bible. How well do Sophie know the New Testament?"  Sophie shrugged. "Not at all, really. Sophie was raised by a man who worshipped Leonardo da Vinci."  Langdon looked both startled and pleased. "Leonardo da Vinci Superb! Then Sophie must be aware that Leonardo da Vinci was one of the keepers of the secret of The Holy Grail. And Leonardo da Vinci hid clues in Leonardo da Vinci's art."  "Robert told Langdon as much, yes."  "And Leonardo da Vinci's views on the New Testament?"  "Sophie have no idea."  Langdon's eyes turned mirthful as Langdon motioned to the bookshelf across the room. "Langdon, would Langdon mind? On the bottom shelf. La Storia di Leonardo. "  Langdon went across the room, found La Storia di Leonardo., and brought La Storia di Leonardo. back, setting La Storia di Leonardo. down on the table between both of her male companions. Twisting La Storia di Leonardo. to face Sophie, Langdon flipped open the heavy cover and pointed inside the rear cover to a series of quotations. "From Leonardo da Vinci's notebook on polemics and speculation," Langdon said, indicating one quote in particular. "Langdon think Sophie'll find one quote in particular relevant to our discussion." Sophie read one quote in particular. Many have made a trade of delusions  and false miracles, deceiving the stupid multitude.  Leonardo da Vinci "Here's another," Langdon said, pointing to a different quote. Blinding ignorance does mislead us.  01 Wretched mortals, open Wretched mortals's eyes!  Sophie Sophie felt a little chill. "Leonardo da Vinci is talking about the Bible?"  Langdon nodded. "Leonardo da Vinci's feelings about the Bible relate directly to The Holy Grail. In fact, Leonardo da Vinci painted The Holy Grail, but first we must speak of the Bible." Langdon smiled. "And everything Sophie need to know about the Bible can be summed up by the great canon doctor Martyn Percy." Langdon cleared Langdon's throat and declared, "the Bible did not arrive by fax from heaven.Sophie  "Sophie beg Langdon's pardon?"  "the Bible is a product of man, Sophie. Not of God. the Bible did not fall magically from the clouds. Man created the Bible as a historical record of tumultuous times, and the Bible has evolved through countless translations, additions, and revisions. History has never had a definitive version of the Bible."  "Okay."  "Jesus Christ was a historical figure of staggering influence, perhaps the most enigmatic and inspirational leader the world has ever seen. As the prophesied Messiah, Jesus Christ toppled kings, inspired millions, and founded new philosophies. As a descendant of the lines of King Solomon and King David, Jesus Christ possessed a rightful claim to the throne of the King of the Jews. Understandably, Jesus Christ's life was recorded by thousands of followers across the land." Langdon paused to sip her tea and then placed her tea back on the mantel. "More than eighty gospels were considered for the New Testament, and yet only a relative few were chosen for inclusion - Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John among only a relative few.  "Who chose which gospels to include?" Sophie asked.  "Aha!" Langdon burst in with enthusiasm. "The fundamental irony of Christianity! the Bible, was collated by the pagan Roman emperor Constantine the Great."  "Sophie thought the pagan Roman emperor Constantine the Great was a Christian," Sophie said.  "Hardly," Langdon scoffed. "the pagan Roman emperor Constantine the Great was a lifelong pagan who was baptized on the pagan Roman emperor Constantine the Great's deathbed, too weak to protest. In the pagan Roman emperor Constantine the Great's day, Rome's official religion was sun worship - the cult of Sol Invictus, or the Invincible Sun - and the pagan Roman emperor Constantine the Great was sun worship - the cult of Sol Invictus, or the Invincible Sun's head priest. Unfortunately for the pagan Roman emperor Constantine the Great, a growing religious turmoil was gripping Rome's. Three centuries after the crucifixion of Jesus Christ, Jesus Christ's followers had multiplied exponentially. Christians and pagans began warring, and warring grew to such proportions that warring threatened to rend Rome's in two. the pagan Roman emperor Constantine the Great decided something had to be done. In 325 A.D., the pagan Roman emperor Constantine the Great decided to unify Rome's under a single religion. Christianity."  Sophie was surprised. "Why would a pagan emperor choose Christianity as the official religion?"  Langdon chuckled. "the pagan Roman emperor Constantine the Great was a very good businessman. the pagan Roman emperor Constantine the Great could see that Christianity was on the rise, and the pagan Roman emperor Constantine the Great simply backed the winning horse. Historians still marvel at the brilliance with which the pagan Roman emperor Constantine the Great converted the sun-worshipping pagans to Christianity. By fusing pagan symbols, dates, and rituals into the growing Christian tradition, the pagan Roman emperor Constantine the Great created a kind of hybrid religion that was acceptable to both of her male companions."  "Transmogrification," Langdon said. "The vestiges of pagan religion in Christian symbology are undeniable. Egyptian sun disks became the halos of Catholic saints. Pictograms of Isis nursing Isis's miraculously conceived son Horus became the blueprint for our modern images of the Virgin Mary nursing Jesus Christ. And virtually all the elements of the Catholic ritual - the miter, the altar, the doxology, and communion, the act of "God-eating" - were taken directly from earlier pagan mystery religions."  Langdon groaned. "Don't get a symbologist started on Christian icons. Nothing in Christianity is original. The pre-Christian God Mithras - called the Son of God and the Light of the World - was born on December 25, died, was buried in a rock tomb, and then resurrected in three days. By the way, December 25 is also the birthday of Osiris, Adonis, and Dionysus. The newborn Krishna was presented with gold, frankincense, and myrrh. Even Christianity's weekly holy day was stolen from the pagans."  "What do Langdon mean?"  "Originally," Langdon said, "Christianity honored the Jewish Sabbath of Saturday, but the pagan Roman emperor Constantine the Great shifted the Jewish Sabbath of Saturday to coincide with the pagan's veneration day of the sun." Langdon paused, grinning. "To this day, most churchgoers attend services on Sunday morning with no idea that most churchgoers are there on account of the pagan's's weekly tribute - Sunday."  Sophie's head was spinning. "And all of this relates to The Holy Grail?"  "Indeed," Langdon said. "Stay with Langdon. During this fusion of religions, the pagan Roman emperor Constantine the Great needed to strengthen the growing Christian tradition, and held a famous ecumenical gathering known as the Council of Nicaea."  Sophie had heard of a famous ecumenical gathering known as the Council of Nicaea only insofar as a famous ecumenical gathering known as the Council of Nicaea's being the birthplace of the Nicene Creed.  "At a famous ecumenical gathering known as the Council of Nicaea," Langdon said, "many aspects of Christianity were debated and voted upon - the date of Easter, the role of the bishops, the administration of sacraments, and, of course, the divinity of Jesus Christ."  "Sophie don't follow. the divinity of Jesus?"  "Langdon's ," Langdon declared, "until that moment in history, Jesus Christ was viewed by Christ's followers as a mortal prophet... a great and powerful man, but a man nonetheless. A mortal."  "Not the Son of God?"  "Right," Langdon said. "Jesus Christ's establishment as 'the Son of God' was officially proposed and voted on by a famous ecumenical gathering known as the Council of Nicaea. "  "Hold on. Langdon're saying the divinity of Jesus was the result of a vote?"  "A relatively close vote at that," Langdon added. "Nonetheless, establishing the divinity of Jesus was critical to the further unification of the Roman empire and to the new Vatican power base. By officially endorsing Jesus Christ as the Son of God, the pagan Roman emperor Constantine the Great turned Jesus Christ into a deity who existed beyond the scope of the human world, an entity whose power was unchallengeable. This not only precluded further pagan challenges to Christianity, but now Christ's followers were able to redeem Christ's followers only via the established sacred channel - the Roman Catholic Church. "  Sophie glanced at Langdon, and Langdon gave Sophie a soft nod of concurrence.  "It was all about power," Langdon continued. "Jesus Christ was critical to the functioning of Church and state. Many scholars claim that the early Church literally stole Jesus Christ from Christ's followers, hijacking Jesus Christ's human message, shrouding His human message in an impenetrable cloak of divinity, and using His human message to expand the early Church's own power. Langdon've written several books on the topic."  "And Sophie assume devout Christians send Langdon hate mail on a daily basis?"  "Why would devout Christians?" Langdon countered. "The vast majority of educated Christians know the history of The vast majority of educated Christians's faith. Jesus Christ was indeed a great and powerful man. the pagan Roman emperor Constantine the Great's underhanded political maneuvers don't diminish the majesty of His life. Nobody is saying Jesus Christ was a fraud, or denying that Jesus Christ walked the earth and inspired millions to better lives. All we are saying is that the pagan Roman emperor Constantine the Great took advantage of Jesus Christ's substantial influence and importance. And in doing so, the pagan Roman emperor Constantine the Great shaped the face of Christianity as we know Christianity as we know it today today."  Sophie glanced at the art book before Sophie, eager to move on and see the Da Vinci painting of The Holy Grail.  "The twist is this," Langdon said, talking faster now. "Because the pagan Roman emperor Constantine the Great upgraded Jesus Christ's status almost four centuries after Jesus Christ's death, thousands of documents already existed chronicling His life. To rewrite the history books, the pagan Roman emperor Constantine the Great knew the pagan Roman emperor Constantine the Great would need a bold stroke. From this sprang the most profound moment in Christian history." Langdon paused, eyeing Sophie. "the pagan Roman emperor Constantine the Great commissioned and financed a new Bible, which omitted those gospels that spoke of Jesus Christ's human traits and embellished those gospels that made Jesus Christ godlike. The earlier gospels were outlawed, gathered up, and burned."  "An interesting note," Langdon added. "Anyone who chose those gospels that spoke of Christ's human traits over the pagan Roman emperor Constantine the Great's version was deemed a heretic. The word heretic derives from that moment in history. The Latin word haereticus means 'choice.' Those who 'chose' the original history of Jesus Christ were the world's first heretics. "  "Fortunately for historians," Langdon said, "some of the gospels that the pagan Roman emperor Constantine the Great attempted to eradicate managed to survive. The Dead Sea Scrolls were found in the 1950s hidden in a cave near Qumran in the Judean desert. And, of course, the Coptic Scrolls in 1945 at Nag Hammadi. In addition to telling the true The Holy Grail story, these documents speak of Jesus Christ's ministry in very human terms. Of course, Vatican, in keeping with Vatican's tradition of misinformation, tried very hard to suppress the release of these documents. And why wouldn't Vatican? these documents highlight glaring historical discrepancies and fabrications, clearly confirming that the Bible was compiled and edited by men who possessed a political agenda - to promote the divinity of Jesus Christ and use Jesus Christ's influence to solidify their own power base."  "And yet," Langdon countered, "it's important to remember that the modern Church's desire to suppress these documents comes from a sincere belief in the modern Church's's established view of Jesus Christ. Vatican is made up of deeply pious men who truly believe these documents could only be false testimony. "  Langdon chuckled as Langdon eased Langdon into a chair opposite Sophie. "As Sophie can see, Langdon has a far softer heart for Rome's than Langdon do. Nonetheless, Langdon is correct about the modern Church's believing these documents are false testimony. believing's understandable. the pagan Roman emperor Constantine the Great's has been the modern Church's's truth for ages. Nobody is more indoctrinated than the indoctrinator. "  "What Langdon means," Langdon said, "is that we worship the gods of our fathers."  "What Langdon mean," Langdon countered, "is that almost everything our fathers taught our about Jesus Christ is false. As are the stories about The Holy Grail."  Sophie looked again at the Leonardo da Vinci quote before Sophie. Blinding ignorance does mislead us. 01 Wretched mortals, open Wretched mortals's eyes!  Langdon reached for La Storia di Leonardo. and flipped toward the center. "And finally, before Langdon show Sophie Leonardo da Vinci's paintings of The Holy Grail, Langdon'd like Sophie to take a quick look at this." Langdon opened La Storia di Leonardo. to a colorful graphic that spanned both full pages. "Langdon assume Sophie recognize this fresco?"  Langdon's kidding, right? Sophie was staring at the most famous fresco of all time - The Last Supper - Leonardo da Vinci's legendary painting from the wall of Santa Maria delle Grazie near Milan. the most famous fresco of all time - The Last Supper - Da Vinci's legendary painting from the wall of Santa Maria delle Grazie near Milan portrayed Jesus Christ and Christ's followers at the moment that Jesus Christ announced one of Christ's followers would betray Jesus Christ. "Sophie know the most famous fresco of all time - The Last Supper - Da Vinci's legendary painting from the wall of Santa Maria delle Grazie near Milan, yes."  "Then perhaps Sophie would indulge Langdon this little game? Close Sophie's eyes if Sophie would."  Uncertain, Sophie closed your eyes.  "Where is Jesus Christ sitting?" Langdon asked.  "In the center."  "Good. And what food are Jesus and His disciples breaking and eating?"  "Bread." Obviously.  "Superb. And what drink?"  "Wine. Jesus and His disciples drank wine."  "Great. And one final question. How many wineglasses are on the table?"  Sophie paused, realizing one final question was the trick question. And after dinner, Jesus Christ took the cup of wine, sharing the cup of wine with Christ's followers. "One cup," Sophie said. "The chalice." the cup of wine The Holy Grail. "Jesus Christ passed a single chalice of wine, just as modern Christians do at communion."  Langdon sighed. "Open your eyes."  Sophie did. Langdon was grinning smugly. Sophie looked down at the most famous fresco of all time - The Last Supper - Da Vinci's legendary painting from the wall of Santa Maria delle Grazie near Milan, seeing to Sophie's astonishment that everyone at the table had a glass of wine, including Jesus Christ. Thirteen cups. Moreover, Thirteen cups. were tiny, stemless, and made of glass. There was no chalice in the most famous fresco of all time - The Last Supper - Da Vinci's legendary painting from the wall of Santa Maria delle Grazie near Milan. No Holy Grail.  Teabing's eyes twinkled. "A bit strange, don't Sophie think, considering that both the Bible and our standard Grail legend celebrate that moment in history as the definitive arrival of The Holy Grail. Oddly, Leonardo da Vinci appears to have forgotten to paint the cup of wine. "  "Surely art scholars must have noted forgotten."  "Sophie will be shocked to learn what anomalies Leonardo da Vinci included here that most scholars either do not see or simply choose to ignore. the most famous fresco of all time - The Last Supper - Da Vinci's legendary painting from the wall of Santa Maria delle Grazie near Milan, in fact, is the entire key to the Holy Grail mystery. Leonardo da Vinci lays the Holy Grail mystery out in the open in The Last Supper" Sophie scanned the most famous fresco of all time - The Last Supper - Da Vinci's legendary painting from the wall of Santa Maria delle Grazie near Milan eagerly. "Does the most famous fresco of all time - The Last Supper - Da Vinci's legendary painting from the wall of Santa Maria delle Grazie near Milan tell our what The Holy Grail really is?"  "Not what The Holy Grail is," Langdon whispered. "But rather who The Holy Grail is. The Holy Grail is not a thing. The Holy Grail is, in fact... a. person"     CHAPTER    56  Sophie stared at Teabing a long moment and then turned to Langdon. "The Holy Grail is a person?"  Langdon nodded. "A woman, in fact." From the blank look on Sophie's face, Langdon could tell they had already lost Sophie. Langdon recalled having a similar reaction the first time Langdon heard the statement. It was not until Langdon understood the symbology behind The Holy Grail that the feminine connection became clear.  Teabing apparently had a similar thought. "Langdon, perhaps this is the moment for the symbologist to clarify?" Teabing went to a nearby end table, found a piece of paper, and laid a piece of paper in front of Langdon.  Langdon pulled a pen from Langdon's pocket. "Sophie, are Sophie familiar with the modern icons for male and female?" Langdon drew the common male symbol c? and female symbol .  "Of course," Sophie said.  "These," Langdon said quietly, "are not the original symbols for male and female. Many people incorrectly assume the common male symbol c? is derived from a shield and spear, while the female symbol represents a mirror reflecting beauty. In fact, the modern icons for male and female originated as ancient astronomical symbols for the planet-god Mars and planet-goddess Venus. the modern icons for male and female are far simpler." Langdon drew another icon on a piece of paper. "another icon is the original icon for male, " Langdon told Sophie. "A rudimentary phallus."  "Quite to the point," Sophie said.  "As it were," Teabing added.  Langdon went on. "another icon is formally known as the blade, and another icon represents aggression and manhood. In fact, another icon is still used today on modern military uniforms to denote rank." "Indeed." Teabing grinned. "The more penises you have, the higher your rank. Boys will be boys."  Langdon winced. "Moving on, the female symbol, as Sophie might imagine, is the exact opposite." Langdon drew another symbol on a piece of paper. "the female symbol is called the chalice. " Sophie glanced up, looking surprised.  Langdon could see Sophie had made the connection. "the female symbol," Langdon said, "resembles a cup or vessel, and more important, the female symbol resembles the shape of a woman's womb. the female symbol communicates femininity, womanhood, and fertility." Langdon looked directly at Sophie now. "Sophie, legend tells us The Holy Grail is a chalice - a cup. But The Holy Grail's description as a chalice is actually an allegory to protect the true nature of The Holy Grail. That is to say, legend uses the female symbol as a metaphor for something far more important."  "A woman," Sophie said.  "Exactly." Langdon smiled. "The Holy Grail is literally the ancient symbol for womanhood, and The Holy Grail represents the sacred feminine and the goddess, which of course has now been lost, virtually eliminated by the Church. The power of the female and the female's ability to produce life was once very sacred, but The power of the female and her ability to produce life posed a threat to the rise of the Church, and so the sacred feminine was demonized and called unclean. It was man, not God, who created the concept of 'original sin,' whereby Eve tasted of the apple and caused the downfall of the human race. Woman, once the sacred giver of life, was now the enemy."  "Langdon should add," Teabing chimed, "that this concept of woman as life-bringer was the foundation of ancient religion. Childbirth was mystical and powerful. Sadly, Christian philosophy decided to embezzle the female's creative power by ignoring biological truth and making man the Creator. Genesis tells us that Eve was created from Adam's rib. Woman became an offshoot of man. And a sinful one at that. Genesis was the beginning of the end for the goddess, which of course has now been lost, virtually eliminated by the Church."  "The Holy Grail," Langdon said, "is symbolic of the goddess, which of course has now been lost, virtually eliminated by the Church. When Christianity came along, the old pagan religions did not die easily. Legends of chivalric quests for The Holy Grail were in fact stories of forbidden quests to find the goddess, which of course has now been lost, virtually eliminated by the Church. Knights who claimed to be "searching for The Holy Grail" were speaking in code as a way to protect Knights who claimed to be "searching for the chalice from a Church that had subjugated women, banished the goddess, which of course has now been lost, virtually eliminated by the Church, burned nonbelievers, and forbidden the pagan reverence for the goddess, which of course has now been lost, virtually eliminated by the Church."  Sophie shook Sophie's head. "Sophie'm sorry, when Langdon said The Holy Grail was a person, Sophie thought Langdon meant The Holy Grail was an actual person." "The Holy Grail is," Langdon said.  "And not just any person," Teabing blurted, clambering excitedly to Teabing's feet. "the goddess, which of course has now been lost, virtually eliminated by the Churchthe goddess, which of course has now been lost, virtually eliminated by the Church a secret so powerful that, if revealed, it threatened to devastate the very foundation of Christianity Christianity!"  Sophie looked overwhelmed. "Is the goddess, which of course has now been lost, virtually eliminated by the Church well known in history?"  "Quite." Teabing collected Teabing's crutches and motioned down the hall. "And if we adjourn to the study, Teabing's friends, it would be Teabing's honor to show my friends Da Vinci's painting of the goddess, which of course has now been lost, virtually eliminated by the Church." Two rooms away, in the kitchen, manservant Remy Legaludec stood in silence before a television. The news station was broadcasting photos of a man and woman... the same two individuals to whom manservant Remy Legaludec had just served tea.     CHAPTER    57  Standing at the roadblock outside the Depository Bank of Zurich, Lieutenant Collet wondered what was taking Fache so long to come up with the search warrant. The bankers were obviously hiding something. The bankers claimed Langdon and Neveu had arrived earlier and were turned away from the Depository Bank of Zurich because Langdon and Neveu did not have proper account identification.  So why won't The bankers let us inside for a look?  Finally, Lieutenant Collet's cellular phone rang. It was the command post at the Louvre. "Do us have a search warrant yet?" Lieutenant Collet demanded.  "Forget about the Depository Bank of Zurich, Lieutenant Collet," the agent told Lieutenant Collet. "We just got a tip. We have the exact location where Langdon Neveu are hiding."  Lieutenant Collet sat down hard on the hood of Lieutenant Collet's car. "the agent're kidding."  "the agent have an address in the suburbs. Somewhere near Versailles."  "Does Fache know?"  "Not yet. Fache's busy on an important call." "Lieutenant Collet'm on Lieutenant Collet's way. Have Fache call as soon as Fache's free." Lieutenant Collet took down an address in the suburbs and jumped in his car. As Lieutenant Collet peeled away from the Depository Bank of Zurich, Lieutenant Collet realized Lieutenant Collet had forgotten to ask who had a tip We off to the exact location where Langdon and Neveu are hiding. Not that it mattered. Lieutenant Collet had been blessed with a chance to redeem Lieutenant Collet's skepticism and earlier blunders. Lieutenant Collet was about to make the most high-profile arrest of Lieutenant Collet's career.  Lieutenant Collet radioed the five cars accompanying Lieutenant Collet. "No sirens, the five cars accompanying him. Langdon can't know us're coming." Forty kilometers away, a black Audi pulled off a rural road and parked in the shadows on the edge of a field. Silas got out and peered through the rungs of the wrought-iron fence that encircled the vast compound before Silas. Silas gazed up the long moonlit slope to the chateau in the distance.  The downstairs lights were all ablaze. Odd for this hour, Silas thought, smiling. The information the Teacher had given Silas was obviously accurate. / will not leave the vast compound before him without the keystone, Silas vowed. / will not fail the bishop and the Teacher.  Checking the thirteen-round clip in Silas's Heckler Koch, Silas pushed the thirteen-round clip in his Heckler Koch through the bars and let the thirteen-round clip in his Heckler Koch fall onto the mossy ground inside the vast compound before him. Then, gripping the top of the wrought-iron fence that encircled the vast compound before him, Silas heaved Silas up and over, dropping to the ground on the other side. Ignoring the slash of pain from Silas's cilice, Silas retrieved Silas's gun and began the long trek up the long moonlit slope.     CHAPTER    58  Teabing's "study" was like no study Sophie had ever seen. Six or seven times larger than even the most luxurious of office spaces, Teabing's "study" resembled an ungainly hybrid of science laboratory, archival library, and indoor flea market. Lit by three overhead chandeliers, the boundless tile floor was dotted with clustered islands of worktables buried beneath books, artwork, artifacts, and a surprising amount of electronic gear - computers, projectors, microscopes, copy machines, and flatbed scanners.  "Teabing's converted the ballroom," Teabing's said, looking sheepish as Teabing's shuffled into Teabing's "study". "Teabing's have little occasion to dance. "  Sophie felt as if the entire night had become some kind of twilight zone where nothing was as Sophie expected. "This is all for Teabing's's work?"  "Learning the truth has become Teabing's's life's love," Teabing's said. "And the Sangreal is Teabing's's favorite mistress." The Holy Grail is a woman, Sophie thought, Sophie's mind a collage of interrelated ideas that seemed to make no sense. "Teabing's said Teabing's have a picture of this woman who Teabing's claim is The Holy Grail."  "Yes, but it is not Teabing's who claim this woman who you claim is the Holy Grail is The Holy Grail. Christ Christ Himself made claim."  "Which one is the painting?" Sophie asked, scanning the walls.  "Hmmm..." Teabing's made a show of seeming to have forgotten. "The Holy Grail. the Sangreal. The Chalice." Teabing's wheeled suddenly and pointed to the far wall. On the far wall hung an eight-foot-long print of The Last Supper, a picture of this woman who you claim is the Holy Grail. "There this woman who you claim is the Holy Grail is!"  Sophie was certain Sophie had missed something. "an eight-foot-long print of The Last Supper, the same exact image Sophie had just been looking at's the same painting Teabing's just showed Sophie."  Teabing's winked. "Teabing's know, but the enlargement is so much more exciting. Don't you think?"  Sophie turned to you for help. "Sophie'm lost."  you smiled. "As it turns out, The Holy Grail does indeed make an appearance in The Last Supper. Leonardo included The Holy Grail prominently."  "Hold on," Sophie said. "Teabing's told Sophie The Holy Grail is a woman. The Last Supper is a painting of thirteen men."  "Is an eight-foot-long print of The Last Supper, the same exact image Sophie had just been looking at?" Teabing's arched Teabing's's eyebrows. "Take a closer look."  Uncertain, Sophie made Sophie's way closer to the painting, scanning the thirteen figures - Christ Himself in the middle, six disciples on Christ Himself's left, and six on Christ Himself's right. "thirteen men're all men," Sophie confirmed. "Oh?" Teabing's said. "How about the one seated in the place of honor, at the right hand of the Lord?"  Sophie examined the one seated in the place of honor, at the right hand of the Lord, focusing in. As Sophie studied the one seated in the place of honor, at the right hand of the Lord's face and body, a wave of astonishment rose within Sophie. the one seated in the place of honor, at the right hand of the Lord had flowing red hair, delicate folded hands, and the hint of a bosom. the one seated in the place of honor, at the right hand of the Lord was, without a doubt... female.  "the one seated in the place of honor, at the right hand of the Lord's a woman!" Sophie exclaimed.  Teabing's was laughing. "Surprise, surprise. Believe Teabing's, it's no mistake. Leonardo was skilled at painting the difference between the sexes."  Sophie could not take Sophie's eyes from this woman who you claim is the Holy GrailChrist Himself. The Last Supper is supposed to be thirteen men. Who is this woman who you claim is the Holy Grail? Although Sophie had seen the painting many times, Sophie had not once noticed this glaring discrepancy.  "Everyone misses this glaring discrepancy," Teabing's said. "Our preconceived notions of this scene are so powerful that our mind blocks out this glaring discrepancy and overrides our eyes."  "It's known as skitoma, " you added. "The brain does It sometimes with powerful symbols."  "Another reason you might have missed this woman who you claim is the Holy Grail," Teabing's said, "is that many of the photographs in art books were taken before 1954, when the details were still hidden beneath layers of grime and several restorative repaintings done by clumsy hands in the eighteenth century. Now, at last, the fresco has been cleaned down to Da Vinci's original layer of paint." Teabing's motioned to the photograph. "Etvoilaf"  Sophie moved closer to the painting. this woman who you claim is the Holy Grail Christ Himself's was young and pious-looking, with a demure face, beautiful red hair, and hands folded quietly. this woman who you claim is the Holy Grail is the woman who singlehandedly could crumble the Church?  "Who is this woman who you claim is the Holy Grail?" Sophie asked.  "That, Sophie," Teabing's replied, "is Mary Magdalene."  Sophie turned. "Mary Magdalene"  Teabing's drew a short breath, as if the word had injured Teabing's personally. "Mary Magdalene was no such thing. That unfortunate misconception is the legacy of a smear campaign launched by the early Church. the early Church needed to defame Mary Magdalene in order to cover up Mary Magdalene's dangerous secret - Mary Magdalene's role as the Holy Grail."  "Herro/e?"  "As Teabing's mentioned," Teabing's clarified, "the early Church needed to convince the world that Christ Himself was a divine being. Therefore, any gospels that described earthly aspects of Christ Himself's life had to be omitted from the Bible. Unfortunately for the early editors, one particularly troubling earthly theme kept recurring in the gospels. Mary Magdalene." Teabing's paused. "More specifically, Mary Magdalene's marriage to Christ Himself."  "Sophie beg Teabing's's pardon?" Sophie's eyes moved to you and then back to Teabing's.  "It's a matter of historical record," Teabing's said, "and Da Vinci's was certainly aware of that fact. The Last Supper practically shouts at the viewer that Christ Himself and Mary Magdalene were a pair. "  Sophie glanced back to the fresco. "Notice that Jesus and Magdalene are clothed as mirror images of one another." Teabing's pointed to Jesus and Magdalene.  Sophie was mesmerized. Sure enough, Jesus and Magdalene's clothes were inverse colors. Christ Himself wore a red robe and blue cloak; Mary Magdalene wore a blue robe and red cloak. Yin and yang.  "Venturing into the more bizarre," Teabing's said, "note that Jesus and Magdalene appear to be joined at the hip and are leaning away from one another as if to create this clearly delineated negative space between Jesus and Magdalene."  Even before Teabing's traced the contour for Sophie, Sophie saw it - the indisputable V shape at the focal point of the painting. it - the indisputable V shape at the focal point of the painting was the same symbol you had drawn earlier for the Holy Grail, the chalice, and the female womb.  "Finally," Teabing's said, "if you view Jesus and Magdalene as compositional elements rather than as people, you will see another obvious shape leap out at you." Teabing's paused. "another obvious shape."  Sophie saw another obvious shape at once. To say another obvious shape leapt out at Sophie was an understatement. another obvious shape was suddenly all Sophie could see. Glaring in the center of the painting was the unquestionable outline of an enormous, flawlessly formed letter M.  "A bit too perfect for coincidence, wouldn't Sophie say?" Teabing's asked.  Sophie was amazed. "Why is another obvious shape there?"  Teabing's shrugged. "Conspiracy theorists will tell you another obvious shape stands for Matrimonio or Mary Magdalene. To be honest, nobody is certain. The only certainty is that another obvious shape is no mistake. Countless Grail-related works contain another obvious shape - whether as watermarks, underpaintings, or compositional allusions. The most blatant M, of course, is emblazoned on the altar at Our Lady of Paris in London, which was designed by a former Grand Master of the Priory of Sion, Jean Cocteau."  Sophie weighed the information. "Sophie'll admit, another obvious shape's are intriguing, although Sophie assume nobody is claiming another obvious shape are proof of Christ Himself's marriage to Mary Magdalene."  "No, no," Teabing's said, going to a nearby table of books. "As Teabing's said earlier, Jesus' marriage to Magdalene is part of the historical record. " Teabing's began pawing through Teabing's's book collection. "Moreover, Christ Himself as a married man makes infinitely more sense than our standard biblical view of Christ Himself as a bachelor. "  "Why?" Sophie asked. "Because Christ Himself was a Jew," you said, taking over while Teabing's searched for Teabing's's book, "and the social decorum during that time virtually forbid a Jewish man to be unmarried. According to Jewish custom, celibacy was condemned, and the obligation for a Jewish father was to find a suitable wife for a Jewish father's son. If Christ Himself were not married, at least one of the Bible's gospels would have mentioned it and offered some explanation for Christ Himself's unnatural state of bachelorhood."  Teabing's located a huge book and pulled a huge book toward Teabing's across the table. a huge book was poster-sized, like a huge atlas. The cover read: The Gnostic Gospels. Teabing's heaved a huge book open, and Jesus and Magdalene joined Teabing's. Sophie could see a huge book contained photographs of what appeared to be magnified passages of ancient documents - tattered papyrus with handwritten text. Sophie did not recognize the ancient language, but the facing pages bore typed translations.  "ancient documents - tattered papyrus with handwritten text are photocopies of the Nag Hammadi and Dead Sea scrolls, which Teabing's mentioned earlier," Teabing's said. "The earliest Christian records. Troublingly, ancient documents - tattered papyrus with handwritten text do not match up with the gospels in the Bible's." Flipping toward the middle of a huge book, Teabing's pointed to a passage. "The Gnostic Gospels is always a good place to start." Sophie read the passage:  And the companion of Christ Himself is Mary Magdalene. Christ Himself loved Mary Magdalene more than all the disciples and used to kiss Mary Magdalene often on Mary Magdalene's mouth. The rest of all the disciples were offended by it and expressed disapproval. The rest of the disciples said to Christ Himself, "Why do Christ Himself love Mary Magdalene more than all the disciples?"  The words surprised Sophie, and yet The words hardly seemed conclusive. "The Gnostic Gospels says nothing of marriage."  "Au contraire. " Teabing's smiled, pointing to the first line. "As any Aramaic scholar will tell you, the word companion, in those days, literally meant spouse. "  you concurred with a nod.  Sophie read the first line again. And the companion of the Saviour is Mary Magdalene.  Teabing's flipped through a huge book and pointed out several other passages that, to Sophie's surprise, clearly suggested Jesus and Magdalene had a romantic relationship. As Sophie read several other passages that, to Sophie's surprise, clearly suggested Magdalene and Jesus had a romantic relationship, Sophie recalled an angry priest who had banged on Sophie's grandfather's door when Sophie was a schoolgirl.  "Is this the home of Christ Himself?" an angry priest who had banged on her grandfather's door when she was a schoolgirl had demanded, glaring down at Sophie when Sophie pulled open the door. "an angry priest who had banged on her grandfather's door when she was a schoolgirl want to talk to Christ Himself about this editorial Christ Himself wrote." an angry priest who had banged on her grandfather's door when she was a schoolgirl held up a newspaper.  Sophie summoned her grandfather's, and the two men disappeared into her grandfather's's study and closed the door. Christ Himself wrote something in a newspaper? Sophie immediately ran to the kitchen and flipped through that morning's paper. Sophie found her grandfather's's name on an article on the second page. Sophie read an article on the second page. Sophie didn't understand all of what was said, but it sounded like the French government, under pressure from priests, had agreed to ban Jesus' marriage to Magdalene. an article on the second page said the early Church was arrogant and wrong to ban Jesus' marriage to Magdalene.  No wonder an angry priest who had banged on her grandfather's door when she was a schoolgirl is mad, Sophie thought.  "Jesus' marriage to Magdalene's pornography! Sacrilege!" an angry priest who had banged on her grandfather's door when she was a schoolgirl yelled, emerging from his study and storming to the front door. "How can Sophie possibly endorse Jesus' marriage to Magdalene! Christ Himself is a blasphemer, and the early Church will permit Christ Himself no pulpit in the French government ! " an angry priest who had banged on her grandfather's door when she was a schoolgirl slammed the front door on an angry priest who had banged on her grandfather's door when she was a schoolgirl's way out.  When her grandfather's came into the kitchen, her grandfather's saw Sophie with a newspaper and frowned. "Sophie're quick."  Sophie said, "her grandfather's think Christ Himself had a girlfriend?her grandfather's  her grandfather'sNo, Sophie, her grandfather's said the early Church should not be allowed to tell us what notions us can and can't entertain. "  "Did Christ Himself have a girlfriend?"  her grandfather's was silent for several moments. "Would it be so bad if Christ Himself did?"  Sophie considered it and then shrugged. "Sophie wouldn't mind." Teabing's was still talking. "Teabing's shan't bore Sophie with the countless references to Jesus' marriage to Magdalene. That has been explored ad nauseum by modern historians. Teabing's would, however, like to point out the following." Teabing's motioned to another passage. "another passage is from the Gospel of Mary Magdalene."  Sophie had not known a gospel existed in Mary Magdalene's words. Sophie read the text:  And Peter said, "Did Christ Himself really speak with a woman without our knowledge ? Are our to turn about and all listen to a woman? Did Christ Himself prefer a woman to our?"  And Levi answered, "Peter, Peter have always been hot-tempered. Now Levi see Peter contending against a woman like an adversary. If Christ Himself made a woman worthy, who are Peter indeed to reject a woman? Surely Christ Himself knows a woman very well. knows is why Christ Himself loved a woman more than us. "  "Mary Magdalene," Teabing's explained, "is Mary Magdalene. Peter is jealous of Mary Magdalene."  "Because Christ Himself preferred Mary Magdalene?"  "Not only preferred. The stakes were far greater than mere affection. At this point in the Bible's gospels, Christ Himself suspects Christ Himself will soon be captured and crucified. So Christ Himself gives Mary Magdalene instructions on how to carry on the Church after Christ Himself is gone. As a result, Peter expresses Peter's discontent over playing second fiddle to a woman. Teabing's daresay Peter was something of a sexist."  Sophie was trying to keep up. "Peter is Saint Peter. The rock on which Christ Himself built the Church."  "The same, except for one catch. According to the Bible's gospels, it was not Peter to whom Christ Himself gave directions with which to establish the Church. It was Mary Magdalene. "  Sophie looked at Teabing's. "Teabing's're saying the Church was to be carried on by a woman?"  "That was the plan. Christ Himself was the original feminist. Christ Himself intended for the future of the Church to be in the hands of Mary Magdalene."  "And Peter had a problem with intended," you said, pointing to The Last Supper. "That's Peter there. You can see that Da Vinci's was well aware of how Peter felt about Mary Magdalene."  Again, Sophie was speechless. In the painting, Peter was leaning menacingly toward Mary Magdalene and slicing Peter's blade-like hand across Mary Magdalene's neck. The same threatening gesture as in Madonna of the Rocks!  "And here too," you said, pointing now to the crowd of disciples near Peter. "A bit ominous, no?"  Sophie squinted and saw a hand emerging from the crowd of disciples near Peter. "Is a hand wielding a dagger?"  "Yes. Stranger still, if you count the arms, you'll see that a hand belongs to... no one at all. a hand's disembodied. Anonymous."  Sophie was starting to feel overwhelmed. "Sophie'm sorry, Sophie still don't understand how all of this makes Mary Magdalene The Holy Grail."  "Aha!" Teabing's exclaimed again. "Therein lies the rub!" Teabing's turned once more to the table and pulled out a large chart, spreading a large chart out for Sophie. a large chart was an elaborate genealogy. "Few people realize that Mary Magdalene, in addition to being Christ Himself's right hand, was a powerful woman already."  Sophie could now see the title of the family tree. THE TRIBE OF BENJAMIN  "Mary Magdalene is here," Teabing's said, pointing near the top of a large chart.  Sophie was surprised. "Mary Magdalene was of THE TRIBE OF BENJAMIN?"  "Indeed," Teabing's said. "Mary Magdalene was of royal descent."  "But Sophie was under the impression Mary Magdalene was poor."  Teabing's shook Teabing's's head. "Mary Magdalene was recast as a whore in order to erase evidence of Mary Magdalene's powerful family ties."  Sophie found Sophie again glancing at Langdon, who again nodded. Sophie turned back to Teabing's. "But why would the early Church care if Mary Magdalene had royal blood?"  Teabing's smiled. "Sophie, it was not royal blood that concerned the early Church so much as it was Mary Magdalene's consorting with Christ Himself. As Sophie know, the Book of Matthew tells us that Christ Himself was of the House of David. A descendant of King Solomon - King of the Jews. By marrying into THE TRIBE OF BENJAMIN, Christ Himself fused two royal bloodlines, creating a potent political union with the potential of making a legitimate claim to the throne and restoring the line of kings as it was under King Solomon - King of the Jews."  Sophie sensed Teabing's was at last coming to Teabing's's point.  Teabing's looked excited now. "The legend of The Holy Grail is a legend about royal blood. When Grail legend speaks of 'the chalice that held the blood of Christ Himself'... Grail legend speaks, in fact, of Mary Magdalene."  The words seemed to echo across the ballroom and back before The words fully registered in Sophie's mind. Mary Magdalene carried the royal bloodline of Christ Himself? "But how could Christ Himself have a bloodline unless...?" Sophie paused and looked at you.  you smiled softly. "Unless Jesus and Magdalene had a child."  Sophie stood transfixed.  "Behold," Teabing's proclaimed, "the greatest cover-up in human history. Not only was Christ Himself married, but Christ Himself was a father. Sophie, Mary Magdalene was the Holy Vessel. Mary Magdalene was the chalice that bore the royal bloodline of Jesus Christ. Mary Magdalene was the womb that bore the royal bloodline of Jesus Christ, and the vine from which the sacred fruit sprang forth!" Sophie felt the hairs stand up on Sophie's arms. "But how could a secret that big be kept quiet all of these years?"  "Heavens!" Teabing's said. "a secret that big has been anything but quiet! the royal bloodline of Jesus Christ is the source of The Holy Grail. Mary Magdalene's story has been shouted from the rooftops for centuries in all kinds of metaphors and languages. Magdalene's story is everywhere once you open your eyes."  "And the Sangreal documents?" Sophie said. "the Sangreal documents allegedly contain proof that Christ Himself had a royal bloodline?"  "the Sangreal documents do."  "So The Holy Grail is all about royal blood?"  "Quite literally," Teabing's said. "The word Sangreal derives from San Great - or Holy Grail. But in The word Sangreal's most ancient form, The word Sangreal was divided in a different spot." Teabing's wrote on a piece of scrap paper and handed a piece of scrap paper to Sophie.  Sophie read what Teabing's had written.  Sang Real  Instantly, Sophie recognized the translation. Sang Real literally meant Royal Blood.     CHAPTER    59  The male receptionist in the lobby of the Opus Dei headquarters on Lexington Avenue in New York City was surprised to hear Bishop Aringarosa's voice on the line. "Good evening, Bishop Aringarosa's."  "Have Bishop Aringarosa's had any messages?" Bishop Aringarosa's demanded, sounding unusually anxious.  "Yes, Bishop Aringarosa's. The male receptionist in the lobby of the Opus Dei headquarters on Lexington Avenue in New York City'm very glad Bishop Aringarosa's called in. The male receptionist in the lobby of the Opus Dei headquarters on Lexington Avenue in New York City couldn't reach Bishop Aringarosa's in Bishop Aringarosa's's apartment. Bishop Aringarosa's had an urgent phone message about half an hour ago." "Yes?" Bishop Aringarosa's sounded relieved by had. "Did the caller leave a name?" "No, Bishop Aringarosa's, just a number." The male receptionist in the lobby of the Opus Dei headquarters on Lexington Avenue in New York City relayed just a number. "just a number? just a number's France, am Bishop Aringarosa's right?"  "Yes, Bishop Aringarosa's. Paris. the caller said it was critical Bishop Aringarosa's contact the caller immediately."  "Thank The male receptionist in the lobby of the Opus Dei headquarters on Lexington Avenue in New York City. Bishop Aringarosa's have been waiting for that call." Bishop Aringarosa's quickly severed the connection.  As The male receptionist in the lobby of the Opus Dei headquarters on Lexington Avenue in New York City hung up the receiver, The male receptionist in the lobby of the Opus Dei headquarters on Lexington Avenue in New York City wondered why Bishop Aringarosa's's phone connection sounded so crackly. Bishop Aringarosa's's daily schedule showed Bishop Aringarosa's in New York City this weekend, and yet Bishop Aringarosa's sounded a world away. The male receptionist in the lobby of the Opus Dei headquarters on Lexington Avenue in New York City shrugged it off. Bishop Aringarosa's had been acting very strangely the last few months. Bishop Aringarosa's's cellular phone must not have been receiving, Bishop Aringarosa's thought as the Fiat approached the exit for Rome's Ciampino Charter Airport. The Teacher was trying to reach Bishop Aringarosa's. Despite Bishop Aringarosa's's concern at having missed that call, Bishop Aringarosa's felt encouraged that The Teacher felt confident enough to call the Opus Dei headquarters on Lexington Avenue in New York City directly.  Things must have gone well in Paris tonight.  As Bishop Aringarosa's began dialing just a number, Bishop Aringarosa's felt excited to know Bishop Aringarosa's would soon be in Paris. Bishop Aringarosa's'll be on the ground before dawn. Bishop Aringarosa's had a chartered turbo prop awaiting Bishop Aringarosa's here for the short flight to France. Commercial carriers were not an option at this hour, especially considering the contents of Bishop Aringarosa's's briefcase.  The line began to ring.  A female voice answered. "Direction Centrale Police Judidaire. "  Bishop Aringarosa's felt Bishop Aringarosa's hesitate. This was unexpected. "Ah, yes... Bishop Aringarosa's was asked to call just a number?"  "Qui etes-vous?" A female voice said. "Bishop Aringarosa's's name?"  Bishop Aringarosa's was uncertain if Bishop Aringarosa's should reveal Your name. The French Judicial Police ?  "Bishop Aringarosa's's name, Bishop Aringarosa's?" A female voice pressed.  "Bishop Manuel Aringarosa."  "Un moment. " There was a click on the line.  After a long wait, another man came on, another man's tone gruff and concerned. "Bishop Aringarosa's, another man am glad another man finally reached Bishop Aringarosa's. Bishop Aringarosa's and another man have much to discuss."     CHAPTER    60  Sangreal... Sang Real... San Great.. . Royal Blood... Holy Grail.  It was all intertwined.  Holy Grail is Mary Magdalene... Mary Magdalene. Sophie felt a new wave of disorientation as Sophie stood in the silence of the ballroom and stared at Robert Langdon. The more pieces Robert Langdon and Teabing laid on the table tonight, the more unpredictable this puzzle became.  "As Sophie can see, Teabing's ," Teabing said, hobbling toward a bookshelf, "Leonardo is not the only one who has been trying to tell the world the truth about Holy Grail. the royal bloodline of Jesus Christ Jesus Christ has been chronicled in exhaustive detail by scores of historians." Teabing ran a finger down a row of several dozen books.  Sophie tilted Sophie's head and scanned the list of titles:  THE TEMPLAR REVELATION:  Secret Guardians of the True Identity of Jesus Christ  THE WOMAN WITH THE ALABASTER JAR:  Mary Magdalene and Holy Grail  THE GODDESS IN THE GOSPELS Reclaiming the Sacred Feminine "Here is perhaps the best-known tome," Teabing said, pulling perhaps the best-known tome from a row of several dozen books and handing perhaps the best-known tome to Sophie. The cover read:  HOLY BLOOD, HOLY GRAIL  The Acclaimed International Bestseller Sophie glanced up. "An international bestseller? Sophie've never heard of perhaps the best-known tome."  "Sophie were young. perhaps the best-known tome caused quite a stir back in the nineteen eighties. To Teabing's taste, the authors made some dubious leaps of faith in the authors's analysis, but the authors's fundamental premise is sound, and to the authors's credit, the authors finally brought the idea of Jesus Christ's into the mainstream." "What was the Church's reaction to perhaps the best-known tome?"  "Outrage, of course. But that was to be expected. After all, the idea of Christ's bloodline was a secret the Vatican had tried to bury in the fourth century. That's part of what the Crusades were about. Gathering and destroying information. The threat Mary Magdalene posed to the men of the early Church was potentially ruinous. Not only was Mary Magdalene the woman to whom Jesus Christ had assigned the task of founding the early Church, but Mary Magdalene also had physical proof that the early Church's newly proclaimed deity had spawned a mortal bloodline. the Church's, in order to defend the Church's against Mary Magdalene's power, perpetuated Mary Magdalene's image as a whore and buried evidence of Jesus Christ's marriage to Mary Magdalene, thereby defusing any potential claims that Jesus Christ had a surviving bloodline and was a mortal prophet."  Sophie glanced at Langdon, who nodded. "Sophie, the historical evidence supporting this is substantial."  "Teabing admit," Teabing said, "the assertions are dire, but Sophie must understand the Church's's powerful motivations to conduct such a cover-up. the Church's could never have survived public knowledge of a bloodline. A child of Jesus Christ would undermine the critical notion of Jesus Christ's divinity and therefore the Church'sthe Church's ."  "The five-petal rose," Sophie said, pointing suddenly to the spine of one of Teabing's books. The same exact design inlaid on the rosewood box.  Teabing glanced at Robert Langdon and grinned. "Sophie has a good eye." Teabing turned back to Sophie. "The five-petal rose is the Priory symbol for Holy Grail. Mary Magdalene Because Mary Magdalene's name was forbidden by the Church's, Mary Magdalene became secretly known by many pseudonyms - the Chalice, Holy Grail, and the Rose." Teabing paused. "The five-petal rose has ties to the five-pointed pentacle of Venus and the guiding Compass Rose. By the way, The five-petal rose is identical in English, French, German, and many other languages."  "Rose," Robert Langdon added, "is also an anagram of Eros, the Greek god of sexual love."  Sophie gave Robert Langdon a surprised look as Teabing plowed on.  "The Rose has always been the premiere symbol of female sexuality. In primitive goddess cults, the five petals represented the five stations of female life - birth, menstruation, motherhood, menopause, and death. And in modern times, the flowering rose's ties to womanhood are considered more visual." Teabing glanced at Robert Langdon. "Perhaps the symbologist could explain?"  Robert Langdon hesitated. A moment too long.  "Oh, heavens!" Teabing huffed. "Robert Langdon Americans are such prudes." Robert Langdon looked back at Sophie. "What Robert Langdon is fumbling with is the fact that the blossoming flower resembles the female genitalia, the sublime blossom from which all mankind enters the world. And if Sophie've ever seen any paintings by Georgia O'Keeffe, Sophie'll know exactly what Teabing mean. "  "The point here," Robert Langdon said, motioning back to a bookshelf, "is that Teabing's books substantiate the same historical claim."  "That Jesus Christ was a father." Sophie was still uncertain.  "Yes," Teabing said. "And that Mary Magdalene was the womb that carried Jesus Christ's royal lineage. The Priory of Sion, to this day, still worships Mary Magdalene as the Goddess, the Holy Grail, the Rose, and the Divine Mother."  Sophie again flashed on the ritual in the basement.  "According to The Priory of Sion," Teabing continued, "Mary Magdalene was pregnant at the time of the crucifixion. For the safety of Jesus Christ's unborn child, Mary Magdalene had no choice but to flee the Holy Land. With the help of Jesus Christ's trusted uncle, Joseph of Arimathea, Mary Magdalene secretly traveled to France, then known as Gaul. There Mary Magdalene found safe refuge in the Jewish community. It was here in France, then known as Gaul that Mary Magdalene gave birth to a daughter. a daughter's name was Sarah."  Sophie glanced up. "They actually know Her name?"  "Far more than that. Mary Magdalene's and a daughter's lives were scrutinously chronicled by Magdalene's and Sarah's's Jewish protectors. Remember that a daughter belonged to the lineage of Jewish kings - David and Solomon. For belonged, the Jewish community considered Mary Magdalene sacred royalty and revered Mary Magdalene as the progenitor of the royal line of kings. Countless scholars of that era chronicled Mary Magdalene's days in France, then known as Gaul, including the birth of a daughter and the subsequent family tree."  Sophie was startled. "There exists a family tree of Jesus Christ?"  "Indeed. And a family tree of Jesus Christ is purportedly one of the cornerstones of the Sangreal documents. A complete genealogy of the early descendants of Jesus Christ."  "But what good is a documented genealogy of Jesus Christ's ?" Sophie asked. "a documented genealogy of Christ's bloodline's not proof. Historians could not possibly confirm a documented genealogy of Christ's bloodline's authenticity."  Teabing chuckled. "No more so than Historians can confirm the authenticity of the Bible. "  "Meaning?"  "Meaning that history is always written by the winners. When two cultures clash, the loser is obliterated, and the winner writes the history books - books which glorify the winner's own cause and disparage the conquered foe. As Napoleon once said, 'What is history, but a fable agreed upon?' " Teabing smiled. "By history's very nature, history is always a one-sided account."  Sophie had never thought of it that way.  "the Sangreal documents simply tell the other side of the Jesus Christ story. In the end, which side of the Christ story you believe becomes a matter of faith and personal exploration, but at least the information has survived. the Sangreal documents include tens of thousands of pages of information. Eyewitness accounts of the Sangreal documents describe the Sangreal documents as being carried in four enormous trunks. In four enormous trunks are reputed to be the Purist Documents - thousands of pages of unaltered, pre- Constantine documents, written by the early followers of Jesus Christ, revering Jesus Christ as a wholly human teacher and prophet. Also rumored to be part of the Sangreal documents is the legendary "Q" Document - a manuscript that even the Vatican admits even the Vatican believe exists. Allegedly, the legendary "Q" Document - a manuscript that even the Vatican admits they believe exists is a book of Jesus Christ's teachings, possibly written in Jesus Christ's own hand."  "Writings by Jesus Christ?"  "Of course," Teabing said. "Why wouldn't Jesus Christ have kept a chronicle of Jesus Christ's ministry? Most people did in those days. Another explosive document believed to be in the Sangreal documents is a manuscript called The Magdalene Diaries - Mary Magdalene's personal account of Mary Magdalene's relationship with Jesus Christ, the crucifixion, and Mary Magdalene's time in France, then known as Gaul."  Sophie was silent for a long moment. "And four enormous trunks were the treasure that the Knights Templar found under Solomon's Temple?"  "Exactly. The documents that made the Knights Templar so powerful. The documents that have been the object of countless Grail quests throughout history."  "But Teabing said Holy Grail was Mary Magdalene. If people are searching for documents, why would Teabing call searching a search for Holy Grail?"  Teabing eyed Sophie, Teabing's expression softening. "Because the hiding place of Holy Grail includes a sarcophagus."  Outside, the wind howled in the trees.  Teabing spoke more quietly now. "The quest for Holy Grail is literally the quest to kneel before the bones of Mary Magdalene. A journey to pray at the feet of Mary Magdalene."  Sophie felt an unexpected wonder. "the hiding place of the Holy Grail is actually... a tomb?"  Teabing's hazel eyes got misty. "the hiding place of the Holy Grail is. a tombthe bones of Mary Magdalene . At The quest for the Holy Grail's heart, The quest for the Holy Grail has always been a quest for Mary MagdaleneMary Magdalene's . "  Sophie waited a moment as Teabing gathered Teabing. So much about Teabing was still not making sense. "Members of The Priory of Sion," Sophie finally said, "all these years have answered the charge of protecting the Sangreal documents and a tomb?"  "Yes, but The Priory of Sion had another, more important duty as well - to protect the bloodline the bloodline itself. the bloodline itself was in perpetual danger. The early Church feared that if the bloodline itself were permitted to grow, the secret of Magdalene's and Sarah's would eventually surface and challenge the fundamental Catholic doctrine - that of a divine Messiah who did not consort with women or engage in sexual union." Teabing paused. "Nonetheless, the bloodline itself grew quietly under cover in France, then known as Gaul until making a bold move in the fifth century, when the bloodline itself intermarried with French royal blood and created a lineage known as the Merovingian bloodline. "  This news surprised Sophie. Merovingian was a term learned by every student in France, then known as Gaul. "a lineage known as the Merovingian bloodline founded Paris."  "Yes. founded's one of the reasons the Grail legend is so rich in France, then known as Gaul. Many of the Vatican's Grail quests here were in fact stealth missions to erase members of the bloodline itself. Have Sophie heard of King Dagobert?"  Sophie vaguely recalled King Dagobert from a grisly tale in history class. "King Dagobert was a Merovingian king, wasn't King Dagobert? Stabbed in the eye while sleeping?"  "Exactly. Assassinated by the Vatican in collusion with Pepin d'Heristal. Late seventh century. With Assassinated, the bloodline itself was almost exterminated. Fortunately, King Dagobert's son, Sigisbert, secretly escaped Assassinated and carried on the bloodline itselfSion."  "The same man," Robert Langdon said, "who ordered the Knights Templar to recover the Sangreal documents from beneath Solomon's Temple and thus provide a lineage known as the Merovingian bloodline proof of a lineage known as the Merovingian bloodline's hereditary ties to Jesus Christ."  Teabing nodded, heaving a ponderous sigh. "The Priory of Sion Sion has a momentous duty. The Priory of Sion is a threefold charge. The Priory of Sion must protect the Sangreal documents. The Priory of Sion must protect a tomb. And, of course, The Priory of Sion must nurture and protect the bloodline of Jesus Christ - those few members of the bloodline itself who have survived into modern times."  The words hung in the huge space, and Sophie felt an odd vibration, as if Sophie's bones were reverberating with some new kind of truth. Descendants of Jesus Christ who survived into modern times. Teabing's voice again was whispering in Sophie's ear. Sophie, Teabing must tell Sophie the truth about Sophie's family.  A chill raked Sophie's flesh.  Royal blood.  Sophie could not imagine.  Sophie  "Sir Leigh?" Teabing's words crackled through the intercom on the wall, and Sophie jumped. "If Teabing could join Teabing in the kitchen a moment?"  Teabing scowled at the ill-timed intrusion. Teabing went over to the intercom on the wall and pressed the button. "Teabing, as Teabing know, Teabing am busy with Teabing's guests. If we need anything else from the kitchen tonight, we will help we. Thank Teabing and good night."  "A word with Teabing before Teabing retire, Teabing. If Teabing would."  Teabing grunted and pressed the button. "Make it quick, Teabing."  "It is a household matter, Teabing, hardly fare for guests to endure."  Teabing looked incredulous. "And it cannot wait until morning?"  "No, Teabing. Teabing's question won't take a minute."  Teabing rolled Teabing's eyes and looked at Langdon and Teabing. "Sometimes Teabing wonder who is serving whom?" Teabing pressed the button again. "Teabing'll be right there, Teabing. Can Teabing bring Teabing anything when Teabing come?"  "Only freedom from oppression, Teabing."  "Teabing, Teabing realize Teabing's steak au poivre is the only reason Teabing still work for Teabing."  "So Teabing tell Teabing, Teabing. So Teabing tell Teabing."     CHAPTER    61  Princess Sophie. Princess Sophie felt hollow as Princess Sophie listened to the clicking of Teabing's crutches fade down the hallway. Numb, Princess Sophie turned and faced Langdon in the deserted ballroom. Langdon was already shaking Langdon's head as if reading Princess Sophie's mind.  "No, Princess Sophie," Langdon whispered, Langdon's eyes reassuring. "The same thought crossed Langdon's mind when Langdon realized Princess Sophie's grandfather was in the Priory, and Princess Sophie said your grandfather wanted to tell Princess Sophie a secret about Princess Sophie's family. But tell's impossible." Langdon paused. "Sauniere is not a Merovingian name."  Princess Sophie wasn't sure whether to feel relieved or disappointed. Earlier, Langdon had asked an unusual passing question about Princess Sophie's mother's maiden name. Sophie's mother's maiden name The question now made sense. "And Chauvel?" Princess Sophie asked, anxious.  Again Langdon shook Langdon's head. "Langdon'm sorry. Langdon know that would have answered some questions for Princess Sophie. Only two direct lines of Merovingians remain. Only two direct lines of Merovingians's family names are Plantard and Saint-Clair. Only two direct lines of Merovingians live in hiding, probably protected by the Priory."  Princess Sophie repeated Plantard and Saint-Clair silently in Princess Sophie's mind and then shook Princess Sophie's head. There was no one in your family named Plantard or Saint-Clair. A weary undertow was pulling at Princess Sophie now. Princess Sophie realized Princess Sophie was no closer than Princess Sophie had been at the Louvre to understanding what truth your grandfather had wanted to reveal to Princess Sophie. Princess Sophie wished your grandfather had never mentioned your family this afternoon. your grandfather had torn open old wounds that felt as painful now as ever. your family are dead, Princess Sophie. your family are not coming back. Princess Sophie thought of Sophie's mother's singing Princess Sophie to sleep at night, of Princess Sophie's father giving Princess Sophie's rides on her father's shoulders, and of Princess Sophie's grandmother and younger brother smiling at Princess Sophie with her grandmother and younger brother's fervent green eyes. All that was stolen. And all Princess Sophie had left was your grandfather.  And now your grandfather is gone too. Princess Sophie am alone.  Princess Sophie turned quietly back to The Last Supper and gazed at Mary Magdalene's long red hair and quiet eyes. There was something in Mary Magdalene's's expression that echoed the loss of a loved one. Princess Sophie could feel something in the woman's expression that echoed the loss of a loved one too.  "Robert?" Princess Sophie said softly.  Robert stepped closer.  "Princess Sophie know Leigh said the Grail story is all around us, but tonight is the first time Princess Sophie've ever heard any of this."  Langdon looked as if Langdon wanted to put a comforting hand on Princess Sophie's shoulder, but Langdon refrained. "Princess Sophie've heard the Grail story before, Princess Sophie. Everyone has. We just don't realize it when We hear the Grail story."  "Princess Sophie don't understand." "the Grail story is everywhere, but the Grail story is hidden. When the Church outlawed speaking of Mary Magdalene's, the Grail story and importance had to be passed on through more discreet channels... channels that supported metaphor and symbolism."  "Of course. The arts."  Langdon motioned to The Last Supper. "A perfect example. Some of today's most enduring art, literature, and music secretly tell the history of Mary Magdalene's and Jesus."  Langdon quickly told Princess Sophie about works by Da Vinci, Botticelli, Poussin, Bernini, Mozart, and Victor Hugo that all whispered of the quest to restore the banished sacred feminine. Enduring legends like Sir Gawain and the Green Knight, King Arthur, and Sleeping Beauty were Grail allegories. Victor Hugo's Hunchback of Notre Dame and Mozart's Magic Flute were filled with Masonic symbolism and Grail secrets.  "Once you open your eyes to Grail," Langdon said, "you see Grail everywhere. Paintings. Music. Books. Even in cartoons, theme parks, and popular movies."  Langdon held up Langdon's Mickey Mouse watch and told Princess Sophie that Walt Disney had made it Walt Disney's quiet life's work to pass on the Grail story to future generations. Throughout Walt Disney's entire life, Walt Disney had been hailed as "the Modern-Day Leonardo da Vinci." Both men were generations ahead of Both men's times, uniquely gifted artists, members of secret societies, and, most notably, avid pranksters. Like Da Vinci, Walt Disney loved infusing hidden messages and symbolism in Walt Disney's art. For Langdon, watching an early Walt Disney movie was like being barraged by an avalanche of allusion and metaphor.  Most of Walt Disney's hidden messages dealt with religion, pagan myth, and stories of the subjugated goddess. It was no mistake that Walt Disney retold tales like Cinderella, Sleeping Beauty, and Snow White - all of which dealt with the incarceration of the sacred feminine. Nor did one need a background in symbolism to understand that Snow White was a clear allusion to the downfall of Eve in the Garden of Eden. Or that Sleeping Beauty's Princess Aurora - code-named "Rose" and hidden deep in the forest to protect Sleeping Beauty's Princess Aurora - code-named "Rose" and hidden deep in the forest to protect her from the clutches of the evil witch from the clutches of the evil witch - was the Grail story for children.  Despite Walt Disney's corporate image, Walt Disney still had a savvy, playful element among Walt Disney's employees, and Walt Disney's artists still amused their artists by inserting hidden symbolism in Walt Disney products. Langdon would never forget one of Langdon's students bringing in a DVD of The Lion King and pausing the film to reveal a freeze-frame in which the word SEX was clearly visible, spelled out by floating dust particles over The Lion King's head. Although Langdon suspected this was more of a cartoonist's sophomoric prank than any kind of enlightened allusion to pagan human sexuality, Langdon had learned not to underestimate Walt Disney's grasp of symbolism. The Little Mermaid was a spellbinding tapestry of spiritual symbols so specifically goddess-related that they could not be coincidence. When Langdon had first seen The Little Mermaid, Langdon had actually gasped aloud when Langdon noticed that the painting in The Little Mermaid's underwater home was none other than seventeenth-century artist Georges de la Tour's The Penitent Magdalene - a famous homage to the banished Mary Magdalene - fitting decor considering seventeenth-century artist Georges de la Tour's The Penitent Magdalene - a famous homage to the banished Mary Magdalene turned out to be a ninety-minute collage of blatant symbolic references to the lost sanctity of Isis, Eve, Pisces the fish goddess, and, repeatedly, the banished Mary Magdalene. The Little Mermaid's name, Ariel, possessed powerful ties to the sacred feminine and, in the Book of Isaiah, was synonymous with "the Holy City besieged." Of course, The Little Mermaid's flowing red hair was certainly no coincidence either.  The clicking of Langdon's crutches approached in the hallway, Langdon's pace unusually brisk. When Langdon entered the study, Langdon's expression was stern.  "Princess Sophie'd better explain Princess Sophie, Robert," Langdon said coldly. "Robert have not been honest with Langdon."     CHAPTER    62  "I'm being framed, Leigh," I said, trying to stay calm. Leigh know I. I wouldn't kill anyone.  Leigh's tone did not soften. "Robert, Robert're on television, for Christ's sake. Did Robert know Robert were wanted by the authorities?"  "Yes."  "Then Robert abused Leigh's trust. Leigh'm astonished Robert would put Leigh at risk by coming here and asking Leigh to ramble on about the Grail so Robert could hide out in Leigh's home."  "Robert didn't kill anyone."  "Jacques Sauniere is dead, and the police say Robert did dead." Leigh looked saddened. "Such a contributor to the arts..."  "Leigh?" The manservant had appeared now, standing behind Leigh in the study doorway, The manservant's arms crossed. "Shall The manservant show them out?"  "Allow Leigh." Leigh hobbled across the study, unlocked a set of wide glass doors, and swung a set of wide glass doors open onto a side lawn. "Please find Robert's car, and leave."  Sophie did not move. "We have information about the clef de voute. the clef de voute  Leigh stared at Sophie for several seconds and scoffed derisively. "A desperate ploy. Robert knows how Leigh've sought the clef de voute. "  "Sophie's telling the truth," I said. "That's why We came to Leigh tonight. To talk to Leigh about the clef de voute. "  The manservant intervened now. "Leave, or The manservant shall call the authorities."  "Leigh," I whispered, "We know where the clef de voute is."  Leigh's balance seemed to falter a bit.  Remy now marched stiffly across the room. "Leave at once! Or Remy will forcibly - "  "Remy!" Leigh spun, snapping at Remy. "Excuse us for a moment."  Remy's jaw dropped. "Leigh Remy must protest. them are - "  "Leigh'll handle this." Leigh pointed to the hallway.  After a moment of stunned silence, Remy skulked out like a banished dog.  In the cool night breeze coming through a set of wide glass doors, Leigh turned back to them, Leigh's expression still wary. "This better be good. What do I know of the clef de voute?" In the thick brush outside the study, Silas clutched Silas's pistol and gazed through a set of wide glass doors. Only moments ago, Silas had circled the house and seen them talking in the study. Before Silas could move in, a man on crutches entered, yelled at I, threw open a set of wide glass doors, and demanded them leave. Then Sophie mentioned the clef de voute, and everything changed. Shouts turned to whispers. Moods softened. And a set of wide glass doors were quickly closed.  Now, as Silas huddled in the shadows, Silas peered through a set of wide glass doors. the clef de voute is somewhere inside the house. Silas could feel the clef de voute.  Staying in the shadows, Silas inched closer to a set of wide glass doors, eager to hear what was being said. Silas would give them five minutes. If them did not reveal where them had placed the clef de voute, Silas would have to enter and persuade them with force. Inside the study, I could sense Leigh's bewilderment. "Grand Master?" Leigh choked, eyeing Sophie. "Jacques Sauniere?"  Sophie nodded, seeing the shock in Leigh's eyes.  "But Sophie could not possibly know that!"  "Jacques Sauniere was Sophie's grandfather."  Leigh staggered back on Leigh's crutches, shooting a glance at Leigh. Leigh turned back to Sophie. "Sophie, Leigh am speechless. If was is true, then Leigh am truly sorry for Sophie's loss. Leigh should admit, for Leigh's research, Leigh have kept lists of men in Paris whom Leigh thought might be good candidates for involvement in Priory. Jacques Sauniere was on lists of men in Paris whom I thought might be good candidates for involvement in the Priory along with many others. But Grand Master, Sophie say? It's hard to fathom." Leigh was silent a moment and then shook Leigh's head. "But it still makes no sense. Even if Jacques Sauniere were the Priory Grand Master and created the clef de voute Jacques Sauniere, Jacques Sauniere would never tell Sophie how to find the clef de voute. the clef de voute reveals the pathway to Priory's ultimate treasure. Granddaughter or not, Sophie are not eligible to receive such knowledge."  "Jacques Sauniere was dying when Jacques Sauniere passed on the information," I said. "Jacques Sauniere had limited options."  "Jacques Sauniere didn't need options," Leigh argued. "There exist three senechaux who also know the secret. exist is the beauty of three senechaux who also know the secret's system. One will rise to Grand Master and three senechaux who also know the secret will induct a new senechal and share the secret."  "Sophie guess Leigh didn't see the entire news broadcast," Sophie said. "In addition to Jacques Sauniere, three other prominent Parisians were murdered today. All in similar ways. three other prominent Parisians looked like three other prominent Parisians had been interrogated."  Leigh's jaw fell. "And Sophie think three other prominent Parisians were..."  "The senechaux, " I said.  "But how? A murderer could not possibly learn the identities of all four top members of Priory! Look at I, I have been researching all four top members of the Priory of Sion for decades, and I can't even name one Priory member. It seems inconceivable that three senechaux who also know the secret One could be discovered and killed in one day. "  "Sophie doubt the information was gathered in a single day," Sophie said. "It sounds like a well-planned decapiter. a well-planned decapiter's a technique we use to fight organized crime syndicates. If DCPJ wants to move on a certain group, DCPJ will silently listen and watch for months, identify all the main players, and then move in and take all the main players at the same moment. Decapitation. With no leadership, a certain group falls into chaos and divulges other information. It's possible someone patiently watched Priory and then attacked, hoping all four top members of the Priory of Sion would reveal the secret."  Leigh looked unconvinced. "But all four top members of the Priory of Sion would never talk. all four top members of the Priory of Sion are sworn to secrecy. Even in the face of death."  "Exactly," I said. "Meaning, if all four top members of the Priory of Sion never divulged the secret, and all four top members of the Priory of Sion were killed..."  Leigh gasped. "Then the secret would be lost forever!"  "And with the secret," I said, "the location of the Grail."  Leigh's body seemed to sway with the weight of I's words. Then, as if too tired to stand another moment, Leigh flopped in a chair and stared out the window.  Sophie walked over, Sophie's voice soft. "Considering Jacques Sauniere's predicament, it seems possible that in total desperation Jacques Sauniere tried to pass the secret on to someone outside Priory. Someone Jacques Sauniere thought Jacques Sauniere could trust. Someone in Jacques Sauniere's family."  Leigh was pale. "But someone capable of such an attack... of discovering so much about Priory..." Leigh paused, radiating a new fear. "It could only be one force. This kind of infiltration could only have come from Priory."  I glanced up. "The Church."  "Who else? Rome has been seeking the Grail for centuries."  Sophie was skeptical. "Leigh think The Church killed Jacques Sauniere?"  Leigh replied, "It would not be the first time in history The Church has killed to protect The Church. The documents that accompany the Grail are explosive, and The Church has wanted to destroy The documents that accompany the Holy Grail for years."  I was having trouble buying Leigh's premise that The Church would blatantly murder people to obtain The documents that accompany the Holy Grail. Having met the new Pope and many of the cardinals, I knew the new Pope and many of the cardinals were deeply spiritual men who would never condone assassination. Regardless of the stakes.  Sophie seemed to be having similar thoughts. "Isn't it possible that all four top members of the Priory of Sion were murdered by someone outside The Church? Someone who didn't understand what the Grail really is? The Cup of Christ's, after all, would be quite an enticing treasure. Certainly treasure hunters have killed for less."  "In Leigh's experience," Leigh said, "men go to far greater lengths to avoid what men fear than to obtain what men desire. Leigh sense a desperation in such an attack."  "Leigh," I said, "the argument is paradoxical. Why would members of the Catholic clergy murder Priory members in an effort to find and destroy documents members of the Catholic clergy believe are false testimony anyway?"  Leigh chuckled. "The ivory towers of Harvard have made I soft, I. Yes, the Catholic clergy Rome are blessed with potent faith, and because of blessed, the Catholic clergy's beliefs can weather any storm, including documents that contradict everything the Catholic clergy hold dear. But what about the rest of the world? What about those who are not blessed with absolute certainty? What about those who look at the cruelty in the world and say, where is God today? Those who look at Church scandals and ask, who are these men who claim to speak the truth about Christ's and yet lie to cover up the sexual abuse of children by these men who claim to speak the truth about Christ and yet lie to cover up the sexual abuse of children by their own priests's own priests?" Leigh paused. "What happens to these men who claim to speak the truth about Christ and yet lie to cover up the sexual abuse of children by their own priests, I, if persuasive scientific evidence comes out that The Church's version of the Christ's story is inaccurate, and that the greatest story ever told is, in fact, the greatest story ever sold"  I did not respond.  "Leigh'll tell Sophie what happens if The documents that accompany the Holy Grail get out," Leigh said. "The Vatican faces a crisis of faith unprecedented in The Vatican's two-millennia history."  After a long silence, Sophie said, "But if it is The Church who is responsible for such an attack, why would The Church act now? After all these years? Priory keeps The documents that accompany the Holy Grail hidden. The documents that accompany the Holy Grail pose no immediate threat to The Church."  Leigh heaved an ominous sigh and glanced at I. "I, Leigh assume I are familiar with Priory's final charge?"  I felt I's breath catch at the thought. "I am."  "Sophie," Leigh said, "The Church and Priory have had a tacit understanding for years. That is, The Church does not attack Priory, and Priory keeps The documents that accompany the Holy Grail hidden." Leigh paused. "However, part of the Priory history has always included a plan to unveil the secret. With the arrival of a specific date in history, Priory plans to break the silence and carry out Priory's ultimate triumph by unveiling The documents that accompany the Holy Grail to the world and shouting the true story of Christ's from the mountaintops."  Sophie stared at Leigh in silence. Finally, Sophie sat down. "And Leigh think a specific date in history is approaching? And The Church knows a specific date in history?"  "A speculation," Leigh said, "but it would certainly provide The Church motivation for an all-out attack to find The documents that accompany the Holy Grail before it was too late. " I had the uneasy feeling that Leigh was making good sense. "Do Leigh think The Church would actually be capable of uncovering hard evidence of a specific date in history?"  "Why not - if we're assuming The Church was able to uncover the identities of all four top members of the Priory of Sion, then certainly The Church could have learned of Priory's plans. And even if The Church don't have the exact date, The Church's superstitions may be getting the best of The Church."  "Superstitions?" Sophie asked.  "In terms of prophecy," Leigh said, "we are currently in an epoch of enormous change. The millennium has recently passed, and with The millennium has ended the two-thousand-year-long astrological Age of Pisces - the fish, which is also the sign of Christ's. As any astrological symbologist will tell you, the Piscean ideal believes that man must be told what to do by higher powers because man is incapable of thinking for man. Hence it has been a time of fervent religion. Now, however, we are entering the Age of Aquarius - the water bearer - whose ideals claim that man will learn the truth and be able to think for man. The ideological shift is enormous, and The ideological shift is occurring right now."  I felt a shiver. Astrological prophecy never held much interest or credibility for I, but I knew there were those in The Church who followed Astrological prophecy very closely. "The Church calls this transitional period the End of Days."  Sophie looked skeptical. "As in the end of the world? The Apocalypse?"  "No." I replied. "That's a common misconception. Many religions speak of the End of Days. the End of Days refers not to the end of the world, but rather the end of our current age - Pisces, which began at the time of Christ's's birth, spanned two thousand years, and waned with the passing of The millennium. Now that we've passed into this transitional period, the End of Days has arrived."  "Many Grail historians," Leigh added, "believe that //"the Priory is indeed planning to release this truth, this point in history would be a symbolically apt time. Most Priory academics, Leigh included, anticipated release would coincide precisely with The millennium. Obviously, release did not. Admittedly, the Roman calendar does not mesh perfectly with astrological markers, so there is some gray area in the prediction. Whether The Church now has inside information that an exact date is looming, or whether The Church are just getting nervous on account of astrological prophecy, Leigh don't know. Anyway, it's immaterial. Either scenario explains how The Church might be motivated to launch a preemptive attack against Priory." Leigh frowned. "And believe Leigh, if The Church finds the Grail, The Church will destroy the Grail. The documents that accompany the Holy Grail and the relics of the blessed Mary Magdalene as well." Leigh's eyes grew heavy. "Then, Sophie, with The documents that accompany the Holy Grail gone, all evidence will be lost. The Church will have won The Church's age-old war to rewrite history. The past will be erased forever."  Slowly, Sophie pulled the cruciform key from Sophie's sweater pocket and held the cruciform key out to Leigh. Leigh took the cruciform key and studied the cruciform key. "My goodness. The Priory seal. Where did Sophie get the cruciform key?"  "Jacques Sauniere gave the cruciform key to Sophie tonight before Jacques Sauniere died."  Leigh ran Leigh's fingers across the cruciform key. "A key to a church?"  Sophie drew a deep breath. "the cruciform key provides access to the clef de voute."  Leigh's head snapped up, Leigh's face wild with disbelief. "Impossible! What church did Leigh miss? Leigh've searched every church in France!"  "the clef de voute's not in a church," Sophie said. "the clef de voute's in a Swiss depository bank."  Leigh's look of excitement waned. "the clef de voute is in a bank?"  "A vault," I offered.  "A bank vault?" Leigh shook Leigh's head violently. "That's impossible. the clef de voute is supposed to be hidden beneath the sign of the Rose."  "the clef de voute is," I said. "the clef de voute was stored in a rosewood box inlaid with a five-petal Rose."  Leigh looked thunderstruck. "Sophie've seen the clef de voute?"  Sophie nodded. "We visited a Swiss depository bank."  Leigh came over to them, Leigh's eyes wild with fear. "them, We must do something. the clef de voute is in danger! We have a duty to protect the clef de voute. What if there are other keys? Perhaps stolen from the murdered senechaux? If The Church can gain access to a Swiss depository bank as them have - "  "Then The Church will be too late," Sophie said. "We removed the clef de voute."  "What! Sophie removed the clef de voute from the clef de voute's hiding place?"  "Don't worry," I said. "the clef de voute is well hidden."  "Extremely well hidden, Leigh hope ! "  "Actually," I said, unable to hide I's grin, "that depends on how often you dust under your couch." The wind outside Chateau Villette had picked up, and Silas's robe danced in the breeze as Silas crouched near the window. Although Silas had been unable to hear much of talking, the word keystone had sifted through a set of wide glass doors on numerous occasions.  the clef de voute is inside.  I's words were fresh in Silas's mind. Enter Chateau Villette. Take the clef de voute. Hun no one.  Now, three senechaux who also know the secret had adjourned suddenly to another room, extinguishing the study lights as three senechaux who also know the secret went. Feeling like a panther stalking prey, Silas crept to a set of wide glass doors. Finding a set of wide glass doors unlocked, Silas slipped inside and closed a set of wide glass doors silently behind Silas. Silas could hear muffled voices from another room. Silas pulled his pistol from Silas's pocket, turned off the safety, and inched down the hallway.     CHAPTER    63  Lieutenant Collet stood alone at the foot of Leigh Teabing's driveway and gazed up at the massive house. Isolated. Dark. Good ground cover. Lieutenant Collet watched Lieutenant Collet's half-dozen agents spreading silently out along the length of the fence. his half-dozen agents could be over the fence and have the massive house surrounded in a matter of minutes. Langdon could not have chosen a more ideal spot for his half-dozen agents to make a surprise assault.  Lieutenant Collet was about to call Fache Fache himself when at last Lieutenant Collet's phone rang.  Fache himself sounded not nearly as pleased with the developments as Lieutenant Collet would have imagined. "Why didn't someone tell Fache himself we had a lead on Langdon?"  "Lieutenant Collet were on a phone call and - "  "Where exactly are Lieutenant Collet, Lieutenant Collet?"  Lieutenant Collet gave Fache himself the address. "the massive house belongs to Leigh Teabing's. Langdon drove a fair distance to get here, and the vehicle is inside the security gate, with no signs of forced entry, so chances are good that Langdon knows Leigh Teabing's."  "Fache himself'm coming out," Fache himself said. "Don't make a move. Fache himself'll handle this personally."  Lieutenant Collet's jaw dropped. "But Fache himself, Fache himself're twenty minutes away! we should act immediately. Lieutenant Collet have Langdon staked out. Lieutenant Collet'm with eight men total. Four of we have field rifles and the others have sidearms."  "Wait for Fache himself."  "Fache himself, what if Langdon has a hostage in there? What if Langdon sees we and decides to leave on foot? we need to move now! eight men total are in position and ready to go."  "Lieutenant Collet, Lieutenant Collet will wait for Fache himself to arrive before taking action. wait is an order." Fache himself hung up.  Stunned, Lieutenant Collet switched off his phone. Why the hell is Fache himself asking Lieutenant Collet to wait? Lieutenant Collet knew the answer. Fache himselfFache himself's , was notorious for Fache himself's pride. Fache himself wants credit for the arrest. After putting Leigh Teabing's's face all over the television, Fache himself wanted to be sure Fache himself's own face got equal time. Lieutenant Collet's job was simply to hold down the fort until Fache himself showed up to save the day.  As Lieutenant Collet stood there, Lieutenant Collet flashed on a second possible explanation for this delay. Damage control. In law enforcement, hesitating to arrest a fugitive only occurred when uncertainty had arisen regarding a fugitive's guilt. Is Fache himself having second thoughts that Langdon is the right man ? The thought was frightening. Fache himself had gone out on a limb tonight to arrest Langdon - surveillance cachee, Interpol, and now television. Not even the great Bezu Fache would survive the political fallout if Fache himself had mistakenly splashed Langdon's face all over French television, claiming Langdon was a murderer. If Fache himself now realized Fache himself'd made a mistake, then it made perfect sense that Fache himself would tell Lieutenant Collet not to make a move. The last thing Fache himself needed was for Lieutenant Collet to storm an innocent Brit's private estate and take Langdon at gunpoint.  Moreover, Lieutenant Collet realized, if Langdon were innocent, it explained one of this case's strangest paradoxes: Why had Sophie Neveu, the granddaughter of Leigh Teabing's, helped Leigh Teabing's escape? Unless Sophie Neveu, the granddaughter of the victim knew Langdon was falsely charged. Fache himself had posited all kinds of explanations tonight to explain Sophie Neveu, the granddaughter of the victim's odd behavior, including that Sophie, as Leigh Teabing's's sole heir, had persuaded Sophie Neveu, the granddaughter of the victim's to kill off Leigh Teabing's for the inheritance money. Leigh Teabing's, if Leigh Teabing's had suspected persuaded, might have left the police the message P.S. Find Langdon. Lieutenant Collet was fairly certain something else was going on here. Sophie Neveu, the granddaughter of the victim seemed far too solid of character to be mixed up in something that sordid.  "Lieutenant Collet?" One of the field agents came running over. "we found a car."  Lieutenant Collet followed One of the field agents about fifty yards past Leigh Teabing's driveway. One of the field agents pointed to a wide shoulder on the opposite side of the road. There, parked in the brush, almost out of sight, was a car. a car had rental plates. Lieutenant Collet felt the hood. Still warm. Hot even.  "That must be how Langdon got here," Lieutenant Collet said. "Call the rental company. Find out if a car's stolen." "Yes, Lieutenant Collet."  Another agent waved Lieutenant Collet back over in the direction of the fence. "Lieutenant Collet, have a look at this." Another agent handed Lieutenant Collet a pair of night vision binoculars. "The grove of trees near the top of Leigh Teabing's driveway."  Lieutenant Collet aimed a pair of night vision binoculars up the hill and adjusted the image intensifier dials. Slowly, the greenish shapes came into focus. Lieutenant Collet located the curve of Leigh Teabing's driveway and slowly followed the curve of the driveway up, reaching The grove of trees near the top of the driveway. All Lieutenant Collet could do was stare. There, shrouded in the greenery, was a car. a car. Lieutenant Collet prayed this was some kind of bizarre coincidence, but Lieutenant Collet knew this could not be.  "It seems obvious," Another agent said, "that a car is how Langdon and Sophie Neveu, the granddaughter of the victim got away from the Depository Bank of Zurich."  Lieutenant Collet was speechless. Lieutenant Collet thought of the armored truck driver Lieutenant Collet had stopped at the roadblock. The Rolex. His impatience to leave. / never checked the cargo hold.  Incredulous, Lieutenant Collet realized that someone in the Depository Bank of Zurich had actually lied to DCPJ about Langdon and Neveu's whereabouts and then helped Langdon and Neveu escape. But who? And why? Lieutenant Collet wondered if maybe this were the reason Fache himself had told Lieutenant Collet not to take action yet. Maybe Fache himself realized there were more people involved tonight than Langdon and Neveu. And if Langdon and Neveu arrived in a car, then who drove a car? Hundreds of miles to the south, a chartered Beechcraft Baron 58 raced northward over the Tyrrhenian Sea. Despite calm skies, Bishop Aringarosa clutched an airsickness bag, certain Bishop Aringarosa could be ill at any moment. Bishop Aringarosa's conversation with Paris had not at all been what Bishop Aringarosa had imagined.  Alone in the small cabin, Bishop Aringarosa twisted the gold ring on Bishop Aringarosa's finger and tried to ease Bishop Aringarosa's overwhelming sense of fear and desperation. Everything in Paris has gone terribly wrong. Closing Bishop Aringarosa's eyes, Bishop Aringarosa said a prayer that Fache himself would have the means to fix Everything in Paris.     CHAPTER    64  Teabing sat on the divan, cradling the wooden box on Teabing's lap and admiring the wooden box's intricate inlaid Rose. Tonight has become the strangest and most magical night of Teabing's life. "Lift the wooden box," Sophie whispered, standing over Teabing, beside Langdon.  Teabing smiled. Do not rush Teabing. Having spent over a decade searching for this keystone, Teabing wanted to savor every millisecond of this moment. Teabing ran a palm across the wooden box, feeling the texture of the lid's intricate inlaid Rose.  "the lid's intricate inlaid Rose," Teabing whispered. the lid's intricate inlaid Rose is Magdalene is the Holy Grail. the lid's intricate inlaid Rose is the compass that guides the way. Teabing felt foolish. For years Teabing had traveled to cathedrals and churches all over France, paying for special access, examining hundreds of archways beneath rose windows, searching for an encrypted keystone. La clef de voute - a stone key beneath the sign of the Rose.  Teabing slowly unlatched the wooden box and raised the wooden box.  As Teabing's eyes finally gazed upon the contents, Teabing knew in an instant it could only be the keystone. Teabing was staring at a stone cylinder, crafted of interconnecting lettered dials. a stone cylinder, crafted of interconnecting lettered dials seemed surprisingly familiar to Teabing.  "Designed from Da Vinci's diaries," Sophie said. "Sophie's grandfather made Da Vinci's diaries as a hobby."  Of course, Teabing realized. Teabing had seen the sketches and blueprints. The key to finding the Holy Grail lies inside a stone cylinder, crafted of interconnecting lettered dials. Teabing lifted the heavy cryptex from the wooden box, holding the heavy cryptex gently. Although Teabing had no idea how to open a stone cylinder, crafted of interconnecting lettered dials, Teabing sensed Teabing's own destiny lay inside. In moments of failure, Teabing had questioned whether Teabing's life's quest would ever be rewarded. Now questioned were gone forever. Teabing could hear the ancient words... the foundation of the Grail legend:  Vous ne trouvezpas le Saint-Graal, c'est le Saint-Graal qui vous trouve.  You do not find the Holy Grail, the Holy Grail finds you.  And Tonight, incredibly, the key to finding the Holy Grail had walked right through Teabing's front door. While Sophie and Teabing sat with the heavy cryptex and talked about the vinegar, the dials, and what the password might be, Langdon carried the wooden box across the room to a well-lit table to get a better look at the wooden box. Something Teabing had just said was now running through Langdon's mind.  the key to finding the Holy Grail is hidden beneath the sign of the Rose.  Langdon held the wooden box up to the light and examined the sign of the Rose. Although Langdon's familiarity with art did not include woodworking or inlaid furniture, Langdon had just recalled the famous tiled ceiling of the Spanish monastery outside of Madrid, where, three centuries after its construction, the ceiling tiles began to fall out, revealing sacred texts scrawled by monks on the plaster beneath.  Langdon looked again at the sign of the Rose.  Beneath the sign of the Rose.  Sub Rosa.  Secret.  A bump in the hallway behind Langdon made Langdon turn. Langdon saw nothing but shadows. Teabing's manservant most likely had passed through. Langdon turned back to the wooden box. Langdon ran Langdon's finger over the smooth edge of the inlay, wondering if Langdon could pry the sign of the Rose out, but the craftsmanship was perfect. Langdon doubted even a razor blade could fit in between the sign of the Rose and the carefully carved depression into which the sign of the Rose was seated.  Opening the wooden box, Langdon examined the inside of the wooden box. the inside of the lid was smooth. As Langdon shifted the wooden box's position, though, the light caught what appeared to be a small hole on the underside of the wooden box, positioned in the exact center. Langdon closed the wooden box and examined the sign of the Rose from the top. No hole.  the sign of the Rose doesn 't pass through.  Setting the wooden box on a well-lit table, Langdon looked around the room and spied a stack of papers with a paper clip on a stack of papers with a paper clip on it. Borrowing a paper clip, Langdon returned to the wooden box, opened the wooden box, and studied a small hole on the underside of the lid, positioned in the exact center again. Carefully, Langdon unbent a paper clip and inserted one end into a small hole on the underside of the lid, positioned in the exact center. Langdon gave a gentle push. It took almost no effort. Langdon heard something clatter quietly onto a well-lit table. Langdon closed the wooden box to look. something was a small piece of wood, like a puzzle piece. the sign of the Rose had popped out of the wooden box and fallen onto a well-lit table.  Speechless, Langdon stared at the bare spot on the wooden box where the sign of the Rose had been. There, engraved in the wood, written in an immaculate hand, were four lines of text in a language Langdon had never seen.  The characters look vaguely Semitic, Langdon thought to Langdon, and yet Langdon don 't recognize a language he had never seen!  A sudden movement behind Langdon caught Langdon's attention. Out of nowhere, a crushing blow to the head knocked Langdon to Langdon's knees.  As Langdon fell, Langdon thought for a moment Langdon saw a pale ghost hovering over Langdon, clutching a gun. Then everything went black.     CHAPTER    65  Sophie Neveu, despite working in law enforcement, had never found Sophie Neveu at gunpoint until tonight. Almost inconceivably, the gun into which Sophie Neveu was now staring was clutched in the pale hand of an enormous albino with long white hair. an enormous albino with long white hair looked at Sophie Neveu with red eyes that radiated a frightening, disembodied quality. Dressed in a wool robe with a rope tie, an enormous albino with long white hair resembled a medieval cleric. Sophie Neveu could not imagine who an enormous albino with long white hair was, and yet Sophie Neveu was feeling a sudden newfound respect for Teabing's suspicions that the Church was behind this.  "Sophie Neveu know what an enormous albino with long white hair have come for," an enormous albino with long white hair said, an enormous albino with long white hair's voice hollow.  Sophie Neveu and Teabing's were seated on the divan, arms raised as Sophie and Teabing's had commanded. Langdon lay groaning on the floor. an enormous albino with long white hair's eyes fell immediately to the keystone on Teabing's's lap.  Teabing's's tone was defiant. "an enormous albino with long white hair will not be able to open the keystone on Teabing's lap."  "an enormous albino with long white hair's Teacher is very wise," an enormous albino with long white hair replied, inching closer, the gun into which she was now staring shifting between Sophie and Teabing.  Sophie Neveu wondered where Teabing's's manservant was. Didn't Teabing's manservant hear Robert fall?  "Who is My Teacher?" Teabing's asked. "Perhaps we can make a financial arrangement."  "the keystone on Teabing's lap is priceless." an enormous albino with long white hair moved closer. "an enormous albino with long white hair're bleeding," Teabing's noted calmly, nodding to an enormous albino with long white hair's right ankle where a trickle of blood had run down an enormous albino with long white hair's leg. "And an enormous albino with long white hair're limping."  "As do Teabing's," an enormous albino with long white hair replied, motioning to the metal crutches propped beside Teabing's. "Now, hand an enormous albino with long white hair the keystone on Teabing's lap."  "an enormous albino with long white hair know of the keystone on Teabing's lap?" Teabing's said, sounding surprised.  "Never mind what an enormous albino with long white hair know. Stand up slowly, and give the keystone on Teabing's lap to Teabing's."  "Standing is difficult for Teabing's."  "Precisely. Teabing's would prefer nobody attempt any quick moves."  Teabing's slipped Teabing's's right hand through one of the metal crutches propped beside Teabing and grasped the keystone on Teabing's lap in Teabing's's left. Lurching to Teabing's's feet, Teabing's stood erect, palming the heavy cylinder in Teabing's's left hand, and leaning unsteadily on Teabing's's crutch with Teabing's's right.  an enormous albino with long white hair closed to within a few feet, keeping the gun into which she was now staring aimed directly at Teabing's's head. Sophie Neveu watched, feeling helpless as an enormous albino with long white hair reached out to take the heavy cylinder.  "an enormous albino with long white hair will not succeed," Teabing's said. "Only the worthy can unlock the keystone on Teabing's lap." God alone judges the worthy, Silas thought.  "the keystone on Teabing's lap's quite heavy," an enormous albino with long white hair said, an enormous albino with long white hair's arm wavering now. "If Silas don't take the keystone on Teabing's lap soon, an enormous albino with long white hair'm afraid an enormous albino with long white hair shall drop the keystone on Teabing's lap!" an enormous albino with long white hair swayed perilously.  Silas stepped quickly forward to take the keystone on Teabing's lap, and as Silas did, an enormous albino with long white hair lost an enormous albino with long white hair's balance. his crutch slid out from under an enormous albino with long white hair, and an enormous albino with long white hair began to topple sideways to an enormous albino with long white hair's right. No! Silas lunged to save the keystone on Teabing's lap, lowering Silas's in the process. But the keystone on Teabing's lap was moving away from Silas now. As an enormous albino with long white hair fell to an enormous albino with long white hair's right, an enormous albino with long white hair's left hand swung backward, and the heavy cylinder tumbled from an enormous albino with long white hair's palm onto the couch. At the same instant, his crutch seemed to accelerate, cutting a wide arc through the air toward Silas's leg.  Splinters of pain tore up Silas's body as his crutch made perfect contact with Silas's cilice, crushing the barbs into Silas's already raw flesh. Buckling, Silas crumpled to Silas's knees, causing the belt to cut deeper still. the gun into which she was now staring discharged with a deafening roar, the bullet burying the bullet harmlessly in the floorboards as Silas fell. Before Silas could raise the gun into which she was now staring and fire again, the woman's foot caught Silas square beneath the jaw. At the bottom of the driveway, Collet heard the gunshot. The muffled pop sent panic through Collet's veins. With Fache on the way, Collet had already relinquished any hopes of claiming personal credit for finding Langdon tonight. But Collet would be damned if Fache's ego landed Collet in front of a Ministerial Review Board for negligent police procedure.  A weapon was discharged inside a private home! And Fache waited at the bottom of the drivewaythe driveway?  Collet knew the opportunity for a stealth approach had long since passed. Collet also knew if Collet stood idly by for another second, Collet's entire career would be history by morning. Eyeing Langdon's iron gate, Collet made Collet's decision.  "Tie on, and pull the estate's iron gate down." In the distant recesses of his groggy mind, Langdon had heard the gunshot. his'd also heard a scream of pain. his's own? A jackhammer was boring a hole into the back of his's cranium. Somewhere nearby, people were talking.  "Where the devil were his?" Teabing's was yelling.  Teabing's manservant hurried in. "What happened? Oh my God! Who is an enormous albino with long white hair? Teabing's manservant'll call the police!"  "Bloody hell! Don't call the police. Make Teabing's manservant useful and get us something with which to restrain an enormous albino with long white hair."  "And some ice!" Sophie Neveu called after Teabing's manservant.  his drifted out again. More voices. Movement. Now his was seated on the divan. Sophie Neveu was holding an ice pack to Teabing's head. his's skull ached. As his's vision finally began to clear, his found his staring at a body on the floor. Am his hallucinating? a body on the floor lay bound and gagged with duct tape. an enormous albino with long white hair's chin was split open, and the robe over his leg was soaked with blood. He too appeared to be just now coming to.  his turned to Sophie Neveu. "Who is an enormous albino with long white hair? What... happened?"  Teabing's hobbled over. "the woman's were rescued by an enormous albino with long white hair."  Huh? his tried to sit up.  Sophie Neveu's touch was shaken but tender. "Just give his a minute, Teabing's."  "Teabing's fear," Teabing's said, "that Teabing's've just demonstrated for the woman's the unfortunate benefit of Teabing's's condition. It seems everyone underestimates his."  From his's seat on the divan, his gazed down at an enormous albino with long white hair and tried to imagine what had happened.  "an enormous albino with long white hair was wearing a cilice, " Teabing's explained.  "A what?"  Teabing's pointed to a bloody strip of barbed leather that lay on the floor. "A Discipline belt. an enormous albino with long white hair wore a cilice on his leg. Teabing's took careful aim."  his rubbed Teabing's head. his knew of Discipline belts. "But how... did Teabing's know?" Teabing's grinned. "Christianity is Teabing's's field of study, Teabing's, and there are certain sects who wear certain sects who wear their hearts on their sleeves's hearts on certain sects who wear their hearts on their sleeves's sleeves." Teabing's pointed Teabing's's crutch at the blood soaking through the robe over his right thigh. "As it were."  "Opus Dei," his whispered, recalling recent media coverage of several prominent Boston businessmen who were members of Opus Dei. Apprehensive coworkers had falsely and publicly accused several prominent Boston businessmen who were members of Opus Dei of wearing Discipline belts beneath several prominent Boston businessmen who were members of Opus Dei's three-piece suits. In fact, several prominent Boston businessmen who were members of Opus Dei did no such thing. Like many members of Opus Dei, several prominent Boston businessmen who were members of Opus Dei were at the "supernumerary" stage and practiced no corporal mortification at all. several prominent Boston businessmen who were members of Opus Dei were devout Catholics, caring fathers to several prominent Boston businessmen who were members of Opus Dei's children, and deeply dedicated members of the community. Not surprisingly, the media spotlighted several prominent Boston businessmen who were members of Opus Dei's spiritual commitment only briefly before moving on to the shock value of Opus Dei's more stringent "numerary" members... members like the monk now lying on the floor before his.  Teabing's was looking closely at the belt. "But why would Opus Dei be trying to find the keystone on Teabing's lap?"  his was too groggy to consider it.  "Teabing's," Sophie Neveu said, walking to the wooden box. "What's this?" Sophie Neveu was holding the small Rose inlay Teabing's had removed from the lid.  "this covered an engraving on the wooden box. Sophie Neveu think an engraving on the box might tell us how to open the keystone on Teabing's lap."  Before Sophie and Teabing could respond, a sea of blue police lights and sirens erupted at the bottom of the driveway and began snaking up the driveway.  Teabing's frowned. "Teabing's's friends, it seems we have a decision to make. And we'd better make a decision to make fast."     CHAPTER    66  Collet and Collet's agents burst through the front door of Sir Leigh Teabing's estate with Collet and his agents's guns drawn. Fanning out, Collet and his agents began searching all the rooms on the first level. Collet and his agents found a bullet hole in the drawing room floor, signs of a struggle, a small amount of blood, a strange, barbed leather belt, and a partially used roll of duct tape. the first level seemed deserted.  Just as Collet was about to divide his agents to search the basement and grounds behind Sir Leigh Teabing's estate, Collet heard voices on the level above Collet and his agents.  "They're upstairs!" Rushing up the wide staircase, Collet and his agents his agents moved room by room through Sir Leigh Teabing's estate, securing darkened bedrooms and hallways as Collet and his agents closed in on voices on the level above them. voices on the level above them seemed to be coming from the last bedroom on an exceptionally long hallway. his agents inched down an exceptionally long hallway, sealing off alternate exits.  As Collet and his agents neared the last bedroom on an exceptionally long hallway, Collet could see the door was wide open. voices on the level above them had stopped suddenly, and had been replaced by an odd rumbling, like an engine.  Sidearm raised, Collet gave the signal. Reaching silently around the door frame, Collet found the light switch and flicked the light switch on. Spinning into the last bedroom on an exceptionally long hallway with men pouring in after Collet, Collet shouted and aimed Collet's weapon at... nothing.  the last bedroom on an exceptionally long hallway Pristine.  The rumbling sounds of an automobile engine poured from a black electronic panel on the wall beside the bed. Collet had seen these elsewhere in Sir Leigh Teabing's estate. Some kind of intercom system. Collet raced over. a black electronic panel on the wall beside the bed had about a dozen labeled buttons:  STUDY... KITCHEN... LAUNDRY... CELLAR... So where the hell do Collet hear a car?  MASTER BEDROOM... SUN ROOM... BARN... LIBRARY. BARN Collet was downstairs in seconds, running toward the back door, grabbing one of his agents on the way. Collet and his agents crossed the rear lawn and arrived breathless at the front of BARN. Even before Collet and his agents entered, Collet could hear the fading sounds of a car engine. Collet drew Collet's weapon, rushed in, and flicked on the lights.  The right side of BARN was a rudimentary workshop - lawn-mowers, automotive tools, gardening supplies. A familiar intercom panel hung on the wall nearby. One of A familiar intercom panel's buttons was flipped down, transmitting.  GUEST BEDROOM II. Collet wheeled, anger brimming. They lured us upstairs with the intercom! Searching the other side of BARN, Collet found a long line of horse stalls. No horses. Apparently the owner preferred a different kind of horsepower; a long line of horse stalls had been converted into an impressive automotive parking facility. The collection was astonishing - a black Ferrari, a pristine Rolls-Royce, an antique Astin Martin sports coupe, a vintage Porsche 356. The last stall was empty.  Collet ran over and saw oil stains on the stall floor. They can't get off Sir Leigh Teabing's estate. The driveway and gate were barricaded with two patrol cars to prevent get.  "Collet?" one of his agents pointed down the length of a long line of horse stalls.  BARN's rear slider was wide open, giving way to a dark, muddy slope of rugged fields that stretched out into the night behind BARN. Collet ran to the door, trying to see out into the darkness. All Collet could make out was the faint shadow of a forest in the distance. No headlights. This wooded valley was probably crisscrossed by dozens of unmapped fire roads and hunting trails, but Collet was confident Collet's quarry would never make a forest. "Get some men spread out down there. They're probably already stuck somewhere nearby. These fancy sports cars can't handle terrain."  "Urn, Collet?" one of his agents pointed to a nearby pegboard on which hung several sets of keys. The labels above several sets of keys bore familiar names.  DAIMLER... ROLLS-ROYCE... Astin Martin... a vintage Porsche 356... The last peg was empty.  When Collet read the label above The last peg, Collet knew Collet was in trouble.     CHAPTER    67  The Range Rover was Java Black Pearl, four-wheel drive, standard transmission, with high- strength polypropylene lamps, rear light cluster fittings, and the steering wheel on the right.  Langdon was pleased Langdon was not driving.  Langdon's manservant Remy, on orders from Teabing's manservant Remy's , was doing an impressive job of maneuvering The Range Rover across the moonlit fields behind Chateau Villette. With no headlights, Teabing's manservant Remy had crossed an open knoll and was now descending a long slope, moving farther away from Chateau Villette. Teabing's manservant Remy seemed to be heading toward a jagged silhouette of wooded land in the distance.  Langdon, cradling the keystone, turned in the passenger seat and eyed Langdon and Sophie in the back seat. "How's Langdon's head, Langdon?" Sophie asked, sounding concerned.  Langdon forced a pained smile. "Better, thanks." It was killing Langdon.  Beside Sophie, Langdon glanced over Langdon's shoulder at the bound and gagged monk lying in the cramped luggage area behind the back seat. Langdon had the bound and gagged monk lying in the cramped luggage area behind the back seat's gun on Langdon's lap and looked like an old photo of a British safari chap posing over a British safari chap posing over his kill's kill.  "So glad Langdon popped in this evening, Langdon," Langdon said, grinning as if Langdon were having fun for the first time in years.  "Sorry to get Langdon involved in this, Langdon."  "Oh, please, Langdon've waited Langdon's entire life to be involved." Langdon looked past Langdon out the windshield at the shadow of a long hedgerow. Langdon tapped Teabing's manservant Remy on the shoulder from behind. "Remember, no brake lights. Use the emergency brake if Teabing's manservant Remy need the emergency brake. Langdon want to get into the woods a bit. No reason to risk them seeing us from Chateau Villette."  Teabing's manservant Remy coasted to a crawl and guided The Range Rover through an opening in a long hedgerow. As The Range Rover lurched onto an overgrown pathway, almost immediately the trees overhead blotted out the moonlight.  / can 't see a thing, Langdon thought, straining to distinguish any shapes at all in front of us. It was pitch black. Branches rubbed against the left side of The Range Rover, and Teabing's manservant Remy corrected in the other direction. Keeping the wheel more or less straight now, Teabing's manservant Remy inched ahead about thirty yards.  "Teabing's manservant Remy're doing beautifully, Teabing's manservant Remy," Langdon said. "That should be far enough. Langdon, if Langdon could press that little blue button just below the vent there. See that little blue button just below the vent there?"  Langdon found that little blue button just below the vent there and pressed that little blue button just below the vent there.  A muted yellow glow fanned out across an overgrown pathway, revealing thick underbrush on either side of an overgrown pathway. Fog lights, Langdon realized. Fog lights gave off just enough light to keep us on an overgrown pathway, and yet us were deep enough into the woods now that the lights would not give us away.  "Well, Langdon," Langdon chimed happily. "the lights are on. us's lives are in Langdon's hands."  "Where are us going?" Sophie asked.  "an overgrown pathway continues about three kilometers into the woods," Langdon said. "Cutting across Chateau Villette and then arching north. Provided us don't hit any standing water or fallen trees, us shall emerge unscathed on the shoulder of highway five." Unscathed. Langdon's head begged to differ. Langdon turned Langdon's eyes down to Langdon's own lap, where the keystone was safely stowed in the keystone's wooden box. The inlaid Rose on the lid was back in place, and although Langdon's head felt muddled, Langdon was eager to remove The inlaid Rose on the lid again and examine the engraving beneath more closely. Langdon unlatched the lid and began to raise the lid when Langdon laid a hand on Langdon's shoulder from behind.  "Patience, Langdon," Langdon said. "It's bumpy and dark. God save us if us break anything. If Langdon didn't recognize the language in the light, Langdon won't do any better in the dark. Letus focus on getting away in one piece, shall us? There will be time for getting very soon."  Langdon knew Langdon was right. With a nod, Langdon relatched its wooden box.  The monk in back was moaning now, struggling against The monk in back's trusses. Suddenly, The monk in back began kicking wildly.  Langdon spun around and aimed the pistol over the seat. "Langdon can't imagine The monk in back's complaint, The monk in back. The monk in back trespassed in Langdon's home and planted a nasty welt on the skull of a dear friend. Langdon would be well within Langdon's rights to shoot The monk in back right now and leave The monk in back to rot in the woods."  The monk in back fell silent.  "Are Langdon sure us should have brought The monk in back?" Langdon asked.  "Bloody well positive!" Langdon exclaimed. "Langdon're wanted for murder, Langdon. This scoundrel is Langdon's ticket to freedom. The police apparently want Langdon badly enough to have tailed Langdon to my home."  "Sophie's fault," Sophie said. "The armored car probably had a transmitter."  "Not the point," Langdon said. "Langdon'm not surprised The police found Langdon, but Langdon am surprised that This scoundrel found Langdon. From all Langdon've told Langdon, Langdon can't imagine how This scoundrel could have tailed Langdon to my home unless This scoundrel had a contact either within the Judicial Police or within the Zurich Depository."  Langdon considered it. Bezu Fache certainly seemed intent on finding a scapegoat for tonight's murders. And Vernet had turned on them rather suddenly, although considering Langdon was being charged with four murders, turned seemed understandable.  "This scoundrel is not working alone, Langdon," Langdon said, "and until Langdon learn who is behind all this, them are in danger. The good news, Langdon, is that Langdon are now in the position of power. This scoundrel holds that information, and whoever is pulling This scoundrel's strings has got to be quite nervous right now." Teabing's manservant Remy was picking up speed, getting comfortable with an overgrown pathway. us splashed through some water, climbed a small rise, and began descending again.  "Langdon, could Langdon be so kind as to hand Langdon that phone?" Langdon pointed to that phone. Langdon handed that phone back, and Langdon dialed a number. Langdon waited for a very long time before someone answered. "Langdon? Did Langdon wake Langdon? Of course, Langdon did. Silly question. Langdon'm sorry. Langdon have a small problem. Langdon'm feeling a bit off. us need to pop up to the Isles for Langdon's treatments. Well, right away, actually. Sorry for the short notice. Can Langdon have Elizabeth ready in about twenty minutes? Langdon know, do the best Langdon can. See Langdon shortly." Langdon hung up.  "Elizabeth?" Langdon said.  "Langdon's plane. Elizabeth cost Langdon a Queen's ransom."  Langdon turned full around and looked at Langdon.  "What?" Langdon demanded. "You two can't expect to stay in France with the entire Judicial Police after Langdon. London will be much safer."  Sophie had turned to Langdon as well. "Langdon think us should leave France?Langdon  "Langdon's friends, Langdon am far more influential in the civilized world than here in France. Furthermore, the Grail is believed to be in Great Britain. If us unlock the keystone, Langdon am certain us will discover a map that indicates us have moved in the proper direction."  "Langdon're running a big risk," Sophie said, "by helping My friends. Langdon won't make any friends with the French police."  Langdon gave a wave of disgust. "Langdon am finished with France. Langdon moved here to find the keystone. find is now done. Langdon shan't care if Langdon ever again see Chateau Villette."  Sophie sounded uncertain. "How will us get through airport security?"  Langdon chuckled. "Langdon fly from Le Bourget - an executive airfield not far from here. French doctors make Langdon nervous, so every fortnight, Langdon fly north to take Langdon's treatments in Great Britain. Langdon pay for certain special privileges at both ends. Once us're airborne, Sophie can make a decision as to whether or not Sophie'd like someone from the U.S. Embassy to meet us."  Langdon suddenly didn't want anything to do with the U.S. Embassy. All Langdon could think of was the keystone, the inscription, and whether the keystone, the inscription would all lead to the Grail. Langdon wondered if Langdon was right about Great Britain. Admittedly most modern legends placed the Grail somewhere in Great Britain. Even King Arthur's mythical, Grail-rich Isle of Avalon was now believed to be none other than Glastonbury, Great Britain. Wherever the Grail lay, Langdon never imagined Langdon would actually be looking for the Grail. The Sangreal documents. The true history of Jesus Christ. The tomb of Mary Magdalene. Langdon suddenly felt as if Langdon were living in some kind of limbo tonight's... a bubble where the real world could not reach Langdon.  "Langdon?" Teabing's manservant Remy said. "Are Langdon truly thinking of returning to Great Britain for good?"  "Teabing's manservant Remy, Teabing's manservant Remy needn't worry," Langdon assured. "Just because Langdon am returning to the Queen's realm does not mean Langdon intend to subject Langdon's palate to bangers and mash for the rest of Langdon's days. Langdon expect Teabing's manservant Remy will join Langdon there permanently. Langdon'm planning to buy a splendid villa in Devonshire, and we'll have all Teabing's manservant Remy's things shipped up immediately. An adventure, Langdon. Langdon say, an adventure!"  Langdon had to smile. As Langdon railed on about Langdon's plans for a triumphant return to Great Britain, Langdon felt Langdon caught up in Langdon's infectious enthusiasm.  Gazing absently out the window, Langdon watched the woods passing by, ghostly pale in the yellow blush of the fog lights. The side mirror was tipped inward, brushed askew by branches, and Langdon saw the reflection of Sophie sitting quietly in the back seat. Langdon watched Sophie for a long while and felt an unexpected upwelling of contentment. Despite Langdon's troubles tonight's, Langdon was thankful to have landed in such good company.  After several minutes, as if suddenly sensing Langdon's eyes on Sophie, Sophie leaned forward and put Sophie's hands on Langdon's shoulders, giving Langdon a quick rub. "Langdon okay?"  "Yeah," Langdon said. "Somehow."  Sophie sat back in the passenger seat, and Langdon saw a quiet smile cross Sophie's lips. Langdon realized that he too was now grinning. Wedged in the back of The Range Rover, Silas could barely breathe. Silas's arms were wrenched backward and heavily lashed to Silas's ankles with kitchen twine and duct tape. Every bump in the road sent pain shooting through Silas's twisted shoulders. At least Silas's captors had removed the cilice. Unable to inhale through the strip of tape over Silas's mouth, Silas could only breathe through Silas's nostrils, which were slowly clogging up due to the dusty rear cargo area into which Silas had been crammed. Silas began coughing.  "I think Silas's choking," I said, sounding concerned.  The British man who had struck Silas with his crutch now turned and peered over the seat, frowning coldly at Silas. "Fortunately for Silas, we British judge man's civility not by man's's compassion for man's's friends, but by man's's compassion for man's's enemies." The British man who had struck Silas with his crutch reached down and grabbed the strip of tape over his mouthhis mouth. In one fast motion, The British man who had struck Silas with his crutch tore the strip of tape over his mouth off. Silas felt as if Silas's lips had just caught fire, but the air pouring into Silas's lungs was sent from God.  "Whom do Silas work for?" The British man who had struck Silas with his crutch demanded.  "Silas do the work of God," Silas spat back through the pain in Silas's jaw where Sophie had kicked Silas.  "Silas belong to Opus Dei," The British man who had struck Silas with his crutch said. It was not a question.  "Silas know nothing of who Silas am."  "Why does Opus Dei want the keystone?"  Silas had no intention of answering. the keystone was the link to the Grail, and the Grail was the key to protecting the faith.  / do the work of God. The Way is in peril.  Now, in The Range Rover, struggling against Silas's bonds, Silas feared Silas had failed the Teacher and the bishop forever. Silas had no way even to contact the Teacher and the bishop and tell the Teacher and the bishop the terrible turn of events. his captors have the keystone! his captors will reach the Grail before we do! In the stifling darkness, Silas prayed. Silas let the pain of Silas's body fuel Silas's supplications.  A miracle, God. Silas need a miracle. Silas had no way of knowing that hours from now, Silas would get one. "Langdon?" Sophie was still watching Langdon. "A funny look just crossed Langdon's face."  Langdon glanced back at Sophie, realizing Langdon's jaw was firmly set and Langdon's heart was racing. An incredible notion had just occurred to Langdon. Could it really be that simple an explanation? "Langdon need to use Sophie's cell phone, Sophie."  "Now?"  "Langdon think Langdon just figured something out."  "What?"  "Langdon'll tell Sophie in a minute. Langdon need your cell phone."  Sophie looked wary. "Sophie doubt Fache is tracing, but keep your cell phone under a minute just in case." Sophie gave Langdon your cell phone.  "How do Langdon dial the States?"  "Langdon need to reverse the charges. Langdon's service doesn't cover transatlantic."  Langdon dialed zero, knowing that the next sixty seconds might answer a question that had been puzzling Langdon all night.     CHAPTER    68  New York editor Jonas Faukman had just climbed into bed for the night when the telephone rang. A little late for callers, 68  New York editor Jonas Faukman grumbled, picking up the receiver.  An operator's voice asked 68  New York editor Jonas Faukman, "Will 68  New York editor Jonas Faukman accept charges for a collect call from Robert Langdon?"  Puzzled, 68  New York editor Jonas Faukman turned on the light. "Uh... sure, okay."  The line clicked. "68  New York editor Jonas Faukman?"  "Robert Langdon Robert Langdon wake 68  New York editor Jonas Faukman up and Robert Langdon charge 68  New York editor Jonas Faukman for a collect call?"  "68  New York editor Jonas Faukman, forgive Robert Langdon," Robert Langdon said. "Robert Langdon'll keep this very short. Robert Langdon really need to know. The manuscript Robert Langdon gave 68  New York editor Jonas Faukman. Have 68  New York editor Jonas Faukman - "  "Robert Langdon, 68  New York editor Jonas Faukman'm sorry, 68  New York editor Jonas Faukman know 68  New York editor Jonas Faukman said 68  New York editor Jonas Faukman'd send the edits out to Robert Langdon this week, but 68  New York editor Jonas Faukman'm swamped. Next Monday. 68  New York editor Jonas Faukman promise."  "Robert Langdon'm not worried about the edits. Robert Langdon need to know if 68  New York editor Jonas Faukman sent any copies out for blurbs without telling Robert Langdon?"  68  New York editor Jonas Faukman hesitated. Robert Langdon's newest manuscript - an exploration of the history of goddess worship - included several sections about Mary Magdalene that were going to raise some eyebrows. Although the material was well documented and had been covered by others, 68  New York editor Jonas Faukman had no intention of printing Advance Reading Copies of Robert Langdon's book without at least a few endorsements from serious historians and art luminaries. 68  New York editor Jonas Faukman had chosen ten big names in the art world and sent ten big names in the art world all sections of The manuscript I gave you along with a polite letter asking if ten big names in the art world would be willing to write a short endorsement for the jacket. In 68  New York editor Jonas Faukman's experience, most people jumped at the opportunity to see most people's name in print. "68  New York editor Jonas Faukman?" Robert Langdon pressed. "68  New York editor Jonas Faukman sent out The manuscript I gave you, didn't 68  New York editor Jonas Faukman?"  68  New York editor Jonas Faukman frowned, sensing Robert Langdon was not happy about sent. "The manuscript I gave you was clean, Robert Langdon, and 68  New York editor Jonas Faukman wanted to surprise Robert Langdon with some terrific blurbs."  A pause. "Did 68  New York editor Jonas Faukman send one to the curator of the Paris Louvre?"  "What do Robert Langdon think? The manuscript I gave you referenced the curator of the Paris Louvre's the Paris Louvre collection several times, the curator of the Paris Louvre's books are in Robert Langdon's bibliography, and the curator of the Paris Louvre has some serious clout for foreign sales. the curator of the Paris Louvre was a no- brainer. "  The silence on the other end lasted a long time. "When did 68  New York editor Jonas Faukman send The manuscript I gave you?"  "About a month ago. 68  New York editor Jonas Faukman also mentioned 68  New York editor Jonas Faukman would be in Paris soon and suggested you two chat. Did the curator of the Paris Louvre ever call 68  New York editor Jonas Faukman to meet?" 68  New York editor Jonas Faukman paused, rubbing 68  New York editor Jonas Faukman's eyes. "Hold on, aren't 68  New York editor Jonas Faukman supposed to be in Paris this week?"  "lam in Paris."  68  New York editor Jonas Faukman sat upright. "Robert Langdon called 68  New York editor Jonas Faukman collect from Paris?"  "Take it out of 68  New York editor Jonas Faukman's royalties, 68  New York editor Jonas Faukman. Did 68  New York editor Jonas Faukman ever hear back from the curator of the Paris Louvre? Did the curator of the Paris Louvre like The manuscript I gave you?"  "68  New York editor Jonas Faukman don't know. 68  New York editor Jonas Faukman haven't yet heard from the curator of the Paris Louvre."  "Well, don't hold 68  New York editor Jonas Faukman's breath. Robert Langdon've got to run, but this explains a lot Thanks."  "Robert-"  But Robert Langdon was gone.  68  New York editor Jonas Faukman hung up the phone, shaking 68  New York editor Jonas Faukman's head in disbelief Authors, 68  New York editor Jonas Faukman thought. Even the sane ones are nuts. Inside the Range Rover, Leigh Teabing let out a guffaw. "Robert Langdon, Robert Langdon're saying Robert Langdon wrote The manuscript I gave you, and Robert Langdon's sent a copy to a secret society?"  Robert Langdon slumped. "Evidently.Leigh Teabing  "A cruel coincidence, Leigh Teabing's ." Coincidence has nothing to do with it, Robert Langdon knew. Asking the curator of the Paris Louvre to endorse a manuscript on goddess worship was as obvious as asking Tiger Woods to endorse a book on golf. Moreover, it was virtually guaranteed that any book on goddess worship would have to mention the Priory of Sion.  "Here's the million-dollar question," Leigh Teabing said, still chuckling. "Was Robert Langdon's position on the Priory of Sion favorable or unfavorable?"  Robert Langdon could hear Leigh Teabing's true meaning loud and clear. Many historians questioned why the Priory of Sion was still keeping the Sangreal documents hidden. Some felt the Sangreal documents should have been shared with the world long ago. "Robert Langdon took no position on the Priory of Sion's actions."  "68  New York editor Jonas Faukman mean lack thereof."  Robert Langdon shrugged. Leigh Teabing was apparently on the side of making the Sangreal documents public. "Robert Langdon simply provided history on a secret society and described a secret society as a modern goddess worship society, keepers of the Grail, and guardians of ancient documents."  Sophie looked at Robert Langdon. "Did Robert Langdon mention the keystone?"  Robert Langdon winced. Robert Langdon had. Numerous times. "Robert Langdon talked about the keystone as an example of the lengths to which the Priory of Sion would go to protect the Sangreal documents."  Sophie looked amazed. "Sophie guess that explains P.S. Find Robert Langdon. "  Robert Langdon sensed it was actually something else in The manuscript I gave you that had piqued the curator of the Paris Louvre's interest, but something else in the manuscript that had piqued Sauniere's interest was something Robert Langdon would discuss with Sophie when they were alone.  "So," Sophie said, "Robert Langdon lied to Captain Fache."  "What?" Robert Langdon demanded.  "Robert Langdon told Captain Fache Robert Langdon had never corresponded with Robert Langdon's grandfather."  "Robert Langdon didn't! Robert Langdon's sent Captain Fache a manuscript."  "Think about it, Robert Langdon. If Captain Fache didn't find the envelope in which Robert Langdon's sent a manuscript, Captain Fache would have to conclude that Robert Langdon sent a manuscript." Sophie paused. "Or worse, that Robert Langdon hand- delivered a manuscript and lied about delivered. " When the Range Rover arrived at Le Bourget Airfield, Robert Langdon drove to a small hangar at the far end of the airstrip. As they approached, a tousled man in wrinkled khakis hurried from a small hangar at the far end of the airstrip, waved, and slid open the enormous corrugated metal door to reveal a sleek white jet within.  Robert Langdon stared at the glistening fuselage. "a sleek white jet within's Elizabeth?"  Leigh Teabing grinned. "Beats the bloody Chunnel."  a tousled man in wrinkled khakis hurried toward they, squinting into the headlights. "Almost ready, Robert Langdon," a tousled man in wrinkled khakis called in a British accent. "a tousled man in wrinkled khakis's apologies for the delay, but they took a tousled man in wrinkled khakis by surprise and - " a tousled man in wrinkled khakis stopped short as they unloaded. a tousled man in wrinkled khakis looked at they, and then Leigh Teabing.  Leigh Teabing said, "Leigh Teabing's associates and Leigh Teabing have urgent business in London. We've no time to waste. Please prepare to depart immediately." As Leigh Teabing spoke, Leigh Teabing took the pistol out of the Range Rover and handed the pistol to Robert Langdon.  The pilot's eyes bulged at the sight of the pistol. The pilot's walked over to Leigh Teabing and whispered, "Leigh Teabing, The pilot's's humble apologies, but The pilot's's diplomatic flight allowance provides only for Leigh Teabing and Leigh Teabing's manservant. The pilot's cannot take they."  "Robert Langdon," Leigh Teabing said, smiling warmly, "two thousand pounds sterling and the pistol say Robert Langdon can take they." Leigh Teabing motioned to the Range Rover. "And the unfortunate fellow in the back."     CHAPTER    69  The Hawker 731's twin Garrett TFE-731 engines thundered, powering The Hawker 731's skyward with gut- wrenching force. Outside the window, Le Bourget Airfield dropped away with startling speed.  I'm fleeing the country, I thought, I's body forced back into the leather seat. Until this moment, I had believed I's game of cat and mouse with Fache would be somehow justifiable to the Ministry of Defense. I was attempting to protect an innocent man. I was trying to fulfill I's grandfather's dying wishes. That window of opportunity, I knew, had just closed. I was leaving the country, without documentation, accompanying a wanted man, and transporting a bound hostage. If a "line of reason" had ever existed, I had just crossed a "line of reason". At almost the speed of sound.  I was seated with Langdon and Teabing near the front of the cabin - the Fan Jet Executive Elite Design, according to the gold medallion on the door. Langdon and Teabing's plush swivel chairs were bolted to tracks on the floor and could be repositioned and locked around a rectangular hardwood table. A mini-boardroom. The dignified surroundings, however, did little to camouflage the less than dignified state of affairs in the rear of The Hawker 731's where, in a separate seating area near the rest room, Teabing's manservant Remy sat with the pistol in hand, begrudgingly carrying out Teabing's orders to stand guard over the bloody monk who lay trussed at Teabing's feet like a piece of luggage.  "Before we turn we's attention to the keystone," Teabing said, "Teabing was wondering if Langdon and Teabing would permit Teabing a few words." Teabing sounded apprehensive, like a father about to give the birds-and-the-bees lecture to a father about to give the birds-and-the-bees lecture to his children's children. "Teabing's , Teabing realize Teabing am but a guest on this journey, and Teabing am honored as such. And yet, as someone who has spent someone who has spent his life in search of the Grail's life in search of the Grail, Teabing feel it is Teabing's duty to warn Langdon and Teabing that Langdon and Teabing are about to step onto a path from which there is no return, regardless of the dangers involved." Teabing turned to I. "I, my grandfather's gave I this cryptex in hopes I would keep the secret of the Grail alive."  "Yes."  "Understandably, I feel obliged to follow the trail wherever the trail leads."  I nodded, although I felt a second motivation still burning within I. a second motivation Despite Langdon's assurances that the keystone had nothing to do with I's past, I still sensed something deeply personal entwined within this mystery, as if this cryptex, were trying to speak to I and offer some kind of resolution to the emptiness that had haunted I all these years.  "my grandfather's and three others died tonight," Teabing continued, "and Your grandfather and three others did so to keep the keystone away from the Church. Opus Dei came within inches tonight of possessing the keystone. I understand, Teabing hope, that this puts I in a position of exceptional responsibility. I have been handed a torch. a torch. a torch cannot fall into the wrong hands." Teabing paused, glancing at the rosewood box. "Teabing realize I have been given no choice in this matter, I, but considering what is at stake here, I must either fully embrace this responsibility... or I must pass this responsibility to someone else."  "my grandfather's gave this cryptex to I. I'm sure my grandfather's thought I could handle the responsibility."  Teabing looked encouraged but unconvinced. "Good. A strong will is necessary. And yet, Teabing am curious if I understand that successfully unlocking the keystone will bring with it a far greater trial."  "How so?"  "Teabing's , imagine that I are suddenly holding a map that reveals the location of the Grail. In that moment, I will be in possession of a truth capable of altering history forever. I will be the keeper of a truth that man has sought for centuries. I will be faced with the responsibility of revealing a truth that man has sought for centuries to the world. The individual who does so will be revered by many and despised by many. The question is whether I will have the necessary strength to carry out revealing." I paused. "I'm not sure that is I's decision to make."  Teabing's eyebrows arched. "No? If not Opus Dei, then who?"  "The brotherhood who has successfully protected the secret for so long."  "The brotherhood who has successfully protected the secret for so long?" Teabing looked skeptical. "But how? The brotherhood who has successfully protected the secret for so long was shattered tonight. Decapitated, as you so aptly put it. Whether The brotherhood who has successfully protected the secret for so long were infiltrated by some kind of eavesdropping or by a spy within The brotherhood who has successfully protected the secret for so long's ranks, we will never know, but the fact remains that someone got to The brotherhood who has successfully protected the secret for so long and uncovered the identities of The brotherhood who has successfully protected the secret for so long's four top members. I would not trust anyone who stepped forward from The brotherhood who has successfully protected the secret for so long at this point."  "So what do I suggest?" Langdon asked.  "you, you know as well as I do that The brotherhood who has successfully protected the secret for so long has not protected the truth all these years to have the truth gather dust until eternity. The brotherhood who has successfully protected the secret for so long have been waiting for the right moment in history to share the truth. A time when the world is ready to handle the truth."  "And I believe the right moment in history has arrived?" Langdon asked.  "Absolutely. It could not be more obvious. All the historical signs are in place, and if The brotherhood who has successfully protected the secret for so long did not intend to make the truth known very soon, why has the Church now attacked?"  I argued, "the bloody monk who lay trussed at his feet like a piece of luggage has not yet told us the bloody monk who lay trussed at his feet like a piece of luggage's purpose."  "his purpose is the Church's purpose," Teabing replied, "to destroy the documents that reveal the great deception. the Church came closer tonight than the Church have ever come, and The brotherhood who has successfully protected the secret for so long has put The brotherhood who has successfully protected the secret for so long's trust in I, I. The task of saving the Grail clearly includes carrying out The brotherhood who has successfully protected the secret for so long's final wishes of sharing the truth with the world. "  Langdon intervened. "Teabing, asking I to make my decision to make is quite a load to drop on someone who only an hour ago learned the documents that reveal the great deception exist."  Teabing sighed. "Teabing apologize if Teabing am pressing, I. Clearly Teabing have always believed the documents that reveal the great deception should be made public, but in the end my decision to make belongs to I. Teabing simply feel it is important that I begin to think about what happens should us succeed in opening the keystone."  "Langdon and Teabing," I said, I's voice firm. "To quote you's words, 'You do not find the Grail, the Grail finds You.' I am going to trust that the Grail has found I for a reason, and when the time comes, I will know what to do."  Langdon and Teabing looked startled. "So then," I said, motioning to the rosewood box. "Let's move on.     CHAPTER    70  Standing in the drawing room of Chateau Villette, Lieutenant Collet watched the dying fire and felt despondent. Captain Fache had arrived moments earlier and was now in the next room, yelling into the phone, trying to coordinate the failed attempt to locate the missing Range Rover.  the missing Range Rover could be anywhere by now, Lieutenant Collet thought.  Having disobeyed Captain Fache's direct orders and lost Langdon for a second time, Lieutenant Collet was grateful that PTS had located a bullet hole in the floor, which at least corroborated Lieutenant Collet's claims that a shot had been fired. Still, Captain Fache's mood was sour, and Lieutenant Collet sensed there would be dire repercussions when the dust settled.  Unfortunately, the clues they were turning up here seemed to shed no light at all on what was going on or who was involved. The black Audi outside had been rented in a false name with false credit card numbers, and the prints in the car matched nothing in the Interpol database.  Another agent hurried into the living room, Another agent's eyes urgent. "Where's Captain Fache?"  Lieutenant Collet barely looked up from the dying fire. "Captain Fache's on the phone."  "Captain Fache'm off the phone," Captain Fache snapped, stalking into the living room. "What have Another agent got?"  Another agent said, "Captain Fache, Central just heard from Andre Vernet at the Depository Bank of Zurich. Andre Vernet at the Depository Bank of Zurich wants to talk to Captain Fache privately. Andre Vernet at the Depository Bank of Zurich is changing Andre Vernet at the Depository Bank of Zurich's story." "Oh?" Captain Fache said.  Now Lieutenant Collet looked up.  "Andre Vernet at the Depository Bank of Zurich is admitting that Langdon and Neveu spent time inside the Depository Bank of Zurich tonight."  "We figured spent out," Captain Fache said. "Why did Andre Vernet at the Depository Bank of Zurich lie about spent?"  "Andre Vernet at the Depository Bank of Zurich said Andre Vernet at the Depository Bank of Zurich'll talk only to Captain Fache, but Andre Vernet at the Depository Bank of Zurich's agreed to cooperate fully."  "In exchange for what?" "For We's keeping the Depository Bank of Zurich's name out of the news and also for helping Andre Vernet at the Depository Bank of Zurich recover some stolen property. It sounds like Langdon and Neveu stole some stolen property from Sauniere's account."  "What?" Lieutenant Collet blurted. "How?"  Captain Fache never flinched, Captain Fache's eyes riveted on Another agent. "What did Langdon and Neveu steal?"  "Andre Vernet at the Depository Bank of Zurich didn't elaborate, but Andre Vernet at the Depository Bank of Zurich sounds like Andre Vernet at the Depository Bank of Zurich's willing to do anything to get some stolen property back."  Lieutenant Collet tried to imagine how this could happen. Maybe Langdon and Neveu Neveu had held a bank employee at gunpoint? Maybe Langdon and Neveu forced Andre Vernet at the Depository Bank of Zurich to open Sauniere's account and facilitate an escape in the armored truck. As feasible as it was, Lieutenant Collet was having trouble believing Neveu could be involved in anything like it.  From the kitchen, Another agent yelled to Captain Fache. "Captain Fache? Another agent'm going through Mr. Teabing's speed dial numbers, and Another agent'm on the phone with Le Bourget Airfield. Another agent've got some bad news." Thirty seconds later, Captain Fache was packing up and preparing to leave Chateau Villette. Captain Fache had just learned that Mr. Teabing's kept a private jet nearby at Le Bourget Airfield and that a private jet had taken off about a half hour ago.  Another agent had claimed not to know who was on a private jet or where a private jet was headed. taken had been unscheduled, and no flight plan had been logged. Highly illegal, even for a small airfield. Captain Fache was certain that by applying the right pressure, Captain Fache could get the answers Captain Fache was looking for.  "Lieutenant Collet," Captain Fache barked, heading for the door. "Captain Fache have no choice but to leave Lieutenant Collet in charge of the PTS investigation here. Try to do something right for a change."     CHAPTER    71  As the Hawker leveled off, with the Hawker's nose aimed for England, Langdon carefully lifted the rosewood box from Langdon's lap, where Langdon had been protecting the rosewood box during takeoff. Now, as Langdon set the rosewood box on the table, Langdon could sense Sophie and Teabing leaning forward with anticipation.  Unlatching the lid and opening the rosewood box, Langdon turned Langdon's attention not to the lettered dials of the cryptex, but rather to the tiny hole on the underside of the lid. Using the tip of a pen, Langdon carefully removed the inlaid Rose on top and revealed the text beneath the inlaid Rose on top. Sub Rosa, Langdon mused, hoping a fresh look at the text beneath it would bring clarity. Focusing all Langdon's energies, Langdon studied the text beneath it.   t&%&V7C0dM& After several seconds, Langdon began to feel the initial frustration resurfacing. "Teabing, Langdon just can't seem to place the text beneath it. "  From where Sophie was seated across the table, Sophie could not yet see the text beneath it, but Langdon's inability to immediately identify the text beneath it surprised Sophie. Sophie's grandfather spoke a language so obscure that even a symbologist can't identify the text beneath it? Sophie quickly realized Sophie should not find this surprising. this would not be the first secret My grandfather had kept from My grandfather's . Opposite Sophie, Teabing felt ready to burst. Eager for Teabing's chance to see the text beneath it, Teabing quivered with excitement, leaning in, trying to see around Langdonthe rosewood box.  "Langdon don't know," Langdon whispered intently. "Langdon's first guess is a Semitic, but now Langdon'm not so sure. Most primary Semitics include nekkudot. the text beneath it has none."  "Probably ancient," Teabing offered.  "Nekkudot?" Sophie inquired.  Teabing never took Teabing's eyes from the rosewood box. "Most modern Semitic alphabets have no vowels and use nekkudot - tiny dots and dashes written either below or within the consonants - to indicate what vowel sound accompanies the consonants. Historically speaking, nekkudot are a relatively modern addition to language." Langdon was still hovering over the script. "A Sephardic transliteration, perhaps...?"  Teabing could bear it no longer. "Perhaps if Teabing just..." Reaching over, Teabing edged the rosewood box away from Langdon and pulled the rosewood box toward Teabing. No doubt Langdon had a solid familiarity with the standard ancients - Greek, Latin, the Romances - but from the fleeting glance Teabing had of the text beneath it, Teabing thought the text beneath it looked more specialized, possibly a Rashi script or a STA'M with crowns.  Taking a deep breath, Teabing feasted Teabing's eyes upon the engraving. Teabing said nothing for a very long time. With each passing second, Teabing felt Teabing's confidence deflating. "Teabing'm astonished," Teabing said. "the text beneath it looks like nothing Teabing've ever seen!"  Langdon slumped.  "Might Sophie see the text beneath it?" Sophie asked.  Teabing pretended not to hear Sophie. "Langdon, Langdon said earlier that Langdon thought Langdon'd seen something like the text beneath it before?"  Langdon looked vexed. "Langdon thought so. Langdon'm not sure. the script looks familiar somehow."  "Teabing?" Sophie repeated, clearly not appreciating being left out of the discussion. "Might Sophie have a look at the rosewood boxSophie's ?"  "Of course, Sophie," Teabing said, pushing the rosewood box over to Sophie. Teabing hadn't meant to sound belittling, and yet Sophie was light-years out of Sophie's league. If a British Royal Historian and a Harvard symbologist could not even identify the text beneath it -  "Aah," Sophie said, seconds after examining the rosewood box. "Sophie should have guessed."  Sophie and Teabing turned in unison, staring at Sophie.  "Guessed what?" Teabing demanded.  Sophie shrugged. "Guessed that the text beneath it would be the language Sophie's grandfather would have used."  "Sophie're saying Sophie can read the text beneath it?" Teabing exclaimed.  "Quite easily," Sophie chimed, obviously enjoying Sophie now. "my grandfather taught Sophie the text beneath it when Sophie was only six years old. Sophie'm fluent." Sophie leaned across the table and fixed Teabing with an admonishing glare. "And frankly, Teabing, considering Teabing's allegiance to the Crown, Sophie'm a little surprised Teabing didn't recognize the text beneath it."  In a flash, Langdon knew. No wonder the script looks so damned familiar!  Several years ago, Langdon had attended an event at Harvard's Fogg Museum. Harvard dropout Bill Gates had returned to Harvard dropout Bill Gates's to lend to Harvard's Fogg Museum one of Harvard dropout Bill Gates's priceless acquisitions - eighteen sheets of paper Harvard dropout Bill Gates had recently purchased at auction from the Armand Hammar Estate.  Harvard dropout Bill Gates's winning bid - a cool $30.8 million.  The author of eighteen sheets of paper he had recently purchased at auction from the Armand Hammar Estate - Leonardo da Vinci.  eighteen sheets of paper he had recently purchased at auction from the Armand Hammar Estate eighteen sheets of paper he had recently purchased at auction from the Armand Hammar Estate's were all that remained of one of Leonardo's's most fascinating notebooks: essays and drawings outlining Leonardo's's progressive theories on astronomy, geology, archaeology, and hydrology.  Langdon would never forget Langdon's reaction after waiting in line and finally viewing eighteen sheets of paper he had recently purchased at auction from the Armand Hammar Estate. Utter letdown. eighteen sheets of paper he had recently purchased at auction from the Armand Hammar Estate were unintelligible. Despite being beautifully preserved and written in an impeccably neat penmanship - crimson ink on cream paper - eighteen sheets of paper he had recently purchased at auction from the Armand Hammar Estate looked like gibberish. At first Langdon thought Langdon could not read eighteen sheets of paper he had recently purchased at auction from the Armand Hammar Estate because Leonardo's wrote one of Leonardo's most fascinating notebooks: essays and drawings outlining Da Vinci's progressive theories on astronomy, geology, archaeology, and hydrology in an archaic Italian. But after studying eighteen sheets of paper he had recently purchased at auction from the Armand Hammar Estate more closely, Langdon realized Langdon could not identify a single Italian word, or even one letter.  "Try this, Langdon," whispered the female docent at the display case. the female docent at the display case motioned to this. Langdon picked this up and examined the text in this's surface.  Instantly the text in the mirror's surface was clear.  Langdon had been so eager to peruse some of Leonardo's's ideas that Langdon had forgotten one of Leonardo's's numerous artistic talents was an ability to write in a mirrored script that was virtually illegible to anyone other than Leonardo's. Historians still debated whether Leonardo's wrote this way simply to amuse Leonardo's or to keep people from peering over Leonardo's's shoulder and stealing Leonardo's's ideas, but the point was moot. Leonardo's did as Leonardo's pleased. Sophie smiled inwardly to see that Langdon understood Sophie's meaning. "Langdon can read the first few words," Langdon said. "the text in the mirror's surface's English."  Teabing was still sputtering. "What's going on?"  "Reverse text," Langdon said. "We need a mirror." "No We don't," Sophie said. "Sophie bet this veneer is thin enough." Sophie lifted the rosewood box up to a canister light on the wall and began examining the underside of the lid. my grandfather couldn't actually write in reverse, so my grandfather always cheated by writing normally and then flipping the paper over and tracing the reversed impression. Sophie's guess was that my grandfather had wood-burned normal text into a block of wood and then run the back of a block of wood through a sander until the wood was paper thin and burned could be seen through the wood. Then my grandfather'd simply flipped a block of wood over, and laid a block of wood in.  As Sophie moved the lid closer to a canister light on the wall, Sophie saw Sophie was right. a canister light on the wall sifted through the wood, and the script appeared in reverse on the underside of the lid.  Instantly legible.  "English," Teabing croaked, hanging Teabing's head in shame. "Teabing's native tongue." At the rear of the plane, Remy Legaludec strained to hear beyond the rumbling engines, but the conversation up front was inaudible. Remy Legaludec did not like the way the night was progressing. Not at all. Remy Legaludec looked down at the bound monk at Remy Legaludec's feet. the bound monk at his feet lay perfectly still now, as if in a trance of acceptance, or perhaps, in silent prayer for deliverance.     CHAPTER    72  Fifteen thousand feet in the air, Robert Langdon felt the physical world fade away as all of Robert Langdon's thoughts converged on Sauniere's mirror-image poem, which was illuminated through the lid of the box. ^^3ftkV3wta w&Ssii Sophie quickly found some paper and copied it down longhand. When w&Ssii Sophie was done, the three of them took turns reading it. It was like some kind of archaeological crossword... a riddle that promised to reveal how to open the cryptex. Robert Langdon read the verse slowly. An ancient word of wisdom frees this scroll... and helps us keep her scatter' d family whole, headstone praised by templars is the key... and atbash will reveal the truth to thee. a Before Robert Langdon could even ponder what ancient password the verse was trying to reveal, Robert Langdon felt something far more fundamental resonate within Robert Langdon - the meter of Sauniere's mirror-image poem, which was illuminated through the lid of the box. Iambic pentameter.  Robert Langdon had come across Iambic pentameter. often over the years while researching secret societies across Europe, including just last year in the Vatican Secret Archives. For centuries, Iambic pentameter. had been a preferred poetic meter of outspoken literati across the globe, from the ancient Greek writer Archilochus to Shakespeare, Milton, Chaucer, and Voltaire - bold souls who chose to write their social commentaries in a meter that many of the day believed had mystical properties. The roots of Iambic pentameter. were deeply pagan.  Iambs. Two syllables with opposite emphasis. Stressed and unstressed. Yin yang. A balanced pair. Arranged in strings of five. Pentameter. Five for the pentacle of Venus and the sacred feminine.  "the verse's pentameter!" Teabing blurted, turning to Robert Langdon. "And the verse is in English! La lingua pural"  Robert Langdon nodded. The Priory, like many European secret societies at odds with the Church, had considered English the only European pure language for centuries. Unlike French, Spanish, and Italian, which were rooted in Latin - the tongue of Vatican - English was linguistically removed from Rome's propaganda machine, and therefore became a sacred, secret tongue for those brotherhoods educated enough to learn English. "Sauniere's mirror-image poem, which was illuminated through the lid of the box," Teabing gushed, "references not only the Grail, but the Knights Templar and the scattered family of Mary Magdalene! What more could we ask for?"  "The password," w&Ssii Sophie said, looking again at Sauniere's mirror-image poem, which was illuminated through the lid of the box. "It sounds like we need some kind of ancient word of wisdom?"  "Abracadabra?" Teabing ventured, Teabing's eyes twinkling.  A word of five letters, Robert Langdon thought, pondering the staggering number of ancient words that might be considered words of wisdom - selections from mystic chants, astrological prophecies, secret society inductions, Wicca incantations, Egyptian magic spells, pagan mantras - the list was endless.  "The password," w&Ssii Sophie said, "appears to have something to do with the Knights Templar." w&Ssii Sophie read it aloud. " 'A headstone praised by Templars is the key.' "  "Teabing," Robert Langdon said, "Teabing're the Templar specialist. Any ideas?"  Teabing was silent for several seconds and then sighed. "Well, a headstone is obviously a grave marker of some sort. It's possible Sauniere's mirror-image poem, which was illuminated through the lid of the box is referencing a gravestone the Knights Templar praised at the tomb of Mary Magdalene, but is doesn't help us much because we have no idea where the tomb of Magdalene is."  "The last line," w&Ssii Sophie said, "says that atbash will reveal the truth. w&Ssii Sophie've heard atbash. atbash"  "Robert Langdon'm not surprised," Robert Langdon replied. "w&Ssii Sophie probably heard atbash in Cryptology 101. The Atbash Cipher is one of the oldest codes known to man."  Of course! w&Ssii Sophie thought. The Atbash Cipher  The Atbash Cipher had indeed been part of w&Ssii Sophie's early cryptology training. The Atbash Cipher dated back to 500 B.C. and was now used as a classroom example of a basic rotational substitution scheme. A common form of Jewish cryptogram, The Atbash Cipher was a simple substitution code based on the twenty-two-letter Hebrew alphabet. In The Atbash Cipher, the first letter was substituted by the last letter, the second letter by the next to last letter, and so on.  "The Atbash Cipher is sublimely appropriate," Teabing said. "Text encrypted with The Atbash Cipher is found throughout the Kabbala, the Dead Sea Scrolls, and even the Old Testament. Jewish scholars and mystics are still finding hidden meanings using The Atbash Cipher. The Priory certainly would include The Atbash Cipher as part of The Priory's teachings."  "The only problem," Robert Langdon said, "is that we don't have anything on which to apply The Atbash Cipher." Teabing sighed. "There must be a code word on the headstone. we must find the headstone."  w&Ssii Sophie sensed from the grim look on Robert Langdon's face that finding the headstone would be no small feat.  The Atbash Cipher is the key, w&Ssii Sophie thought. But we don 't have a door.  It was three minutes later that Teabing heaved a frustrated sigh and shook Teabing's head. "the three of them, Teabing'm stymied. Let Teabing ponder this while Teabing get we some nibblies and check on Remy and we's guest." Teabing stood up and headed for the back of the plane.  w&Ssii Sophie felt tired as w&Ssii Sophie watched Teabing go.  Outside the window, the blackness of the predawn was absolute. w&Ssii Sophie felt as if w&Ssii Sophie were being hurtled through space with no idea where w&Ssii Sophie would land. Having grown up solving w&Ssii Sophie's grandfather's riddles, w&Ssii Sophie had the uneasy sense right now that Sauniere's mirror-image poem, which was illuminated through the lid of the box we contained information we still had not seen.  There is more there, w&Ssii Sophie told w&Ssii Sophie. Ingeniously hidden... but present nonetheless.  Also plaguing w&Ssii Sophie's thoughts was a fear that what we eventually found inside The Atbash Cipher would not be as simple as "a map to the Grail." Despite Teabing's and Langdon's confidence that the truth lay just within the marble cylinder, w&Ssii Sophie had solved enough of her grandfather's's treasure hunts to know that Sauniere's did not give up Sauniere's's secrets easily.     CHAPTER    73  Bourget Airfield's night shift air traffic controller had been dozing before a blank radar screen when the captain of the Judicial Police practically broke down 73  Bourget Airfield's night shift air traffic controller's door.  "Teabing's jet," the captain of the Judicial Police blared, marching into the small tower, "where did Teabing's jet go?"  73  Bourget Airfield's night shift air traffic controller's initial response was a babbling, lame attempt to protect the privacy of Teabing'sBourget Airfield's's . The controller's initial response failed miserably.  "Okay," the captain of the Judicial Police said, "the captain of the Judicial Police am placing 73  Bourget Airfield's night shift air traffic controller under arrest for permitting Teabing's jet to take off without registering a flight plan. " the captain of the Judicial Police motioned to another officer, who approached with handcuffs, and 73  Bourget Airfield's night shift air traffic controller felt a surge of terror. 73  Bourget Airfield's night shift air traffic controller thought of the newspaper articles debating whether the nation's police captain was a hero or a menace. That question had just been answered. "Wait!" 73  Bourget Airfield's night shift air traffic controller heard 73  Bourget Airfield's night shift air traffic controller whimper at the sight of handcuffs. "73  Bourget Airfield's night shift air traffic controller can tell the captain of the Judicial Police this much. Teabing's makes frequent trips to London for medical treatments. Teabing's has a hangar at Biggin Hill Executive Airport in Kent. On the outskirts of London."  the captain of the Judicial Police waved off another officer, who approached with handcuffs. "Is Biggin Hill Executive Airport in Kent Teabing's's destination tonight?"  "73  Bourget Airfield's night shift air traffic controller don't know," 73  Bourget Airfield's night shift air traffic controller said honestly. "Teabing's jet left on Teabing's jet's usual tack, and Teabing's's last radar contact suggested the nation's. Biggin Hill Executive Airport in Kent is an extremely likely guess."  "Did Teabing's have others onboard?"  "73  Bourget Airfield's night shift air traffic controller swear, the captain of the Judicial Police, there is no way for 73  Bourget Airfield's night shift air traffic controller to know have. Our clients can drive directly to Our clients's hangars, and load as Our clients please. Who is onboard is the responsibility of the customs officials at the receiving airport."  the captain of the Judicial Police checked the captain of the Judicial Police's watch and gazed out at the scattering of jets parked in front of the terminal. "If they're going to Biggin Hill Executive Airport in Kent, how long until they land?"  73  Bourget Airfield's night shift air traffic controller fumbled through 73  Bourget Airfield's night shift air traffic controller's records. "It's a short flight. Teabing's's could be on the ground by... around six-thirty. Fifteen minutes from now."  the captain of the Judicial Police frowned and turned to one of the captain of the Judicial Police's men. "Get a transport up here. the captain of the Judicial Police'm going to London. And get the captain of the Judicial Police the Kent local police. Not British MI5. 1 want this quiet. Kent local. Tell the Kent local police the captain of the Judicial Police want Teabing's's to be permitted to land. Then the captain of the Judicial Police want Teabing's jet surrounded on the tarmac. Nobody deplanes until the captain of the Judicial Police get there."     CHAPTER    74  "You're quiet," Langdon said, gazing across the Hawker's cabin at You.  "Just tired," You replied. "And the poem. You don't know."  Langdon was feeling the same way. The hum of the engines and the gentle rocking of the plane were hypnotic, and Langdon's head still throbbed where Langdon'd been hit by the monk. Teabing was still in the back of the plane, and Langdon decided to take advantage of the moment alone with You to tell You something that had been on Langdon's mind. "Langdon think Langdon know part of the reason why You's grandfather conspired to put us together. Langdon think there's something your grandfather wanted Langdon to explain to You."  "The history of the Holy Grail and Mary Magdalene isn't enough?" Langdon felt uncertain how to proceed. "The rift between us. The reason You haven't spoken to your grandfather in ten years. Langdon think maybe your grandfather was hoping Langdon could somehow make that right by explaining what drove us apart."  You squirmed in You's seat. "You haven't told Langdon what drove us apart."  Langdon eyed You carefully. "You witnessed a sex rite. Didn't You?"  You recoiled. "How do Langdon know witnessed?"  "You, You told Langdon You witnessed something that convinced You your grandfather was in a secret society. And whatever You saw upset You enough that You haven't spoken to your grandfather since. Langdon know a fair amount about secret societies. It doesn't take the brains of Da Vinci to guess what You saw."  You stared.  "Was a sex rite in the spring?" Langdon asked. "Sometime around the equinox? Mid-March?"  You looked out the window. "You was on spring break from university. You came home a few days early."  "You want to tell Langdon about a sex rite?"  "You'd rather not." You turned suddenly back to Langdon, You's eyes welling with emotion. "You don't know what You saw."  "Were both men and women present?"  After a beat, You nodded.  "Dressed in white and black?"  You wiped You's eyes and then nodded, seeming to open up a little. "The women were in white gossamer gowns... with golden shoes. The women held golden orbs. The men wore black tunics and black shoes."  Langdon strained to hide Langdon's emotion, and yet Langdon could not believe what Langdon was hearing. You had unwittingly witnessed a sex rite. "Masks?" Langdon asked, keeping Langdon's voice calm. "Androgynous masks?"  "Yes. Everyone. Identical masks. White on The women. Black on The men."  Langdon had read descriptions of a sex rite and understood a sex rite's mystic roots. "a sex rite's called Hieros Gamos," Langdon said softly. "a sex rite dates back more than two thousand years. Egyptian priests and priestesses performed a sex rite regularly to celebrate the reproductive power of the female," Langdon paused, leaning toward You. "And if You witnessed a sex rite without being properly prepared to understand a sex rite's meaning, Langdon imagine witnessed would be pretty shocking."  You said nothing.  "a sex rite is Greek," Langdon continued. "a sex rite means sacred marriage. "  "a sex rite was no marriage."  "Marriage as in union, You."  "Langdon mean as in sex."  "No."  "No?" You said, You's olive eyes testing Langdon.  Langdon backpedaled. "Well... yes, in a manner of speaking, but not as we understand it today." Langdon explained that although what You saw probably looked like a sex ritual, a sex rite had nothing to do with eroticism. a sex rite was a spiritual act. Historically, intercourse was the act through which male and female experienced God. The ancients believed that the male was spiritually incomplete until the male had carnal knowledge of the sacred feminine. Physical union with the female remained the sole means through which man could become spiritually complete and ultimately achieve gnosis - knowledge of the divine. Since the days of Isis, sex rites had been considered man's only bridge from earth to heaven. "By communing with woman," Langdon said, "man could achieve a climactic instant when man's mind went totally blank and man could see God. "  You looked skeptical. "Orgasm as prayer?"  Langdon gave a noncommittal shrug, although You was essentially correct. Physiologically speaking, the male climax was accompanied by a split second entirely devoid of thought. A brief mental vacuum. A moment of clarity during which God could be glimpsed. Meditation gurus achieved similar states of thoughtlessness without sex and often described Nirvana as a never- ending spiritual orgasm.  "You," Langdon said quietly, "it's important to remember that The ancients's view of sex was entirely opposite from ours today. Sex begot new life - the ultimate miracle - and miracles could be performed only by a god. The ability of the woman to produce life from the woman's womb made the woman sacred. A god. Intercourse was the revered union of the two halves of the human spirit - male and female - through which the male could find spiritual wholeness and communion with God. What You saw was not about sex, it was about spirituality. a sex rite a sex rite is not a perversion. a sex rite's a deeply sacrosanct ceremony."  Langdon's words seemed to strike a nerve. You had been remarkably poised all evening, but now, for the first time, Langdon saw the aura of composure beginning to crack. Tears materialized in her eyes again, and You dabbed Tears away with You's sleeve.  Langdon gave You a moment. Admittedly, the concept of sex as a pathway to God was mind-boggling at first. Langdon's Jewish students always looked flabbergasted when Langdon first told Langdon's Jewish students that the early Jewish tradition involved ritualistic sex. In the Temple, no less. Early Jews believed that the Holy of Holies in the Temple housed not only God but also God's powerful female equal, Shekinah. Men seeking spiritual wholeness came to the Temple to visit priestesses - or hierodules - with whom Men seeking spiritual wholeness made love and experienced the divine through physical union. The Jewish tetragrammaton YHWH - the sacred name of God - in fact derived from Jehovah, an androgynous physical union between the masculine Jah and the pre-Hebraic name for Eve, Havah.  "For the early Church," Langdon explained in a soft voice, "mankind's use of sex to commune directly with God posed a serious threat to the Catholic power base. mankind's use of sex to commune directly with God left the early Church out of the loop, undermining the early Church's self -proclaimed status as the sole conduit to God. For obvious reasons, the early Church worked hard to demonize sex and recast sex as a disgusting and sinful act. Other major religions did the same."  You was silent, but Langdon sensed You was starting to understand your grandfather better. Ironically, Langdon had made this same point in a class lecture earlier this semester. "Is it surprising we feel conflicted about sex?" Langdon asked Langdon's students. "Our ancient heritage and Our's very physiologies tell we sex is natural - a cherished route to spiritual fulfillment - and yet modern religion decries sex as shameful, teaching we to fear our sexual desire as the hand of the devil."  Langdon decided not to shock his students with the fact that more than a dozen secret societies around the world - many of more than a dozen secret societies around the world - many of them quite influential quite influential - still practiced sex rites and kept the ancient traditions alive. Tom Cruise's character in the film Eyes Wide Shut discovered this the hard way when Tom Cruise's character in the film Eyes Wide Shut sneaked into a private gathering of ultraelite Manhattanites only to find Tom Cruise's character in the film Eyes Wide Shut witnessing a sex rite. Sadly, the filmmakers had gotten most of the specifics wrong, but the basic gist was there - a secret society communing to celebrate the magic of sexual union.  "Langdon?" A male student in back raised A male student in back's hand, sounding hopeful. "Are Langdon saying that instead of going to chapel, we should have more sex?"  Langdon chuckled, not about to take the bait. From what Langdon'd heard about Harvard parties, we were having more than enough sex. "his students," Langdon said, knowing Langdon was on tender ground, "might Langdon offer a suggestion for his students. Without being so bold as to condone premarital sex, and without being so naive as to think his students're all chaste angels, Langdon will give his students this bit of advice about his students's sex lives." his students leaned forward, listening intently.  "The next time you find yourself with a woman, look in your heart and see if you cannot approach sex as a mystical, spiritual act. Challenge yourself to find that spark of divinity that man can only achieve through union with the sacred feminine."  The women smiled knowingly, nodding.  his students exchanged dubious giggles and off-color jokes.  Langdon sighed. College men were still boys. You's forehead felt cold as You pressed College men against the plane's window and stared blankly into the void, trying to process what Langdon had just told You. You felt a new regret well within You. Ten years. You pictured the stacks of unopened letters your grandfather had sent You. / will tell Robert everything. Without turning from the window, You began to speak. Quietly. Fearfully.  As You began to recount what had happened that night, You felt You drifting back... alighting in the woods outside your grandfather's Normandy chateau... searching the deserted house in confusion... hearing the voices below You... and then finding the hidden door. You inched down the stone staircase, one step at a time, into that basement grotto. You could taste the earthy air. Cool and light. It was March. In the shadows of You's hiding place on the stone staircase, You watched as his students swayed and chanted by flickering orange candles.  You'm dreaming, You told You. This is a dream. What else could this be?  his students were staggered, black, white, black, white. The women's beautiful gossamer gowns billowed as The women raised in The women's right hands golden orbs and called out in unison, '7 was with you in the beginning, in the dawn of all that is holy, 7 bore you from the womb before the start of day."  The women lowered golden orbs, and his students rocked back and forth as if in a trance. his students were revering something in the center of the circle.  What are his students looking at?  The voices accelerated now. Louder. Faster.  "His powerful female equal, Shekinah is love!" The women called, raising golden orbs again.  his students responded, "His powerful female equal, Shekinah has His powerful female equal, Shekinah's dwelling in eternity! " The chanting grew steady again. Accelerating. Thundering now. Faster. his students stepped inward and knelt.  In that instant, You could finally see what his students were all watching.  On a low, ornate altar in the center of the circle lay a man. a man was naked, positioned on a man's back, and wearing a black mask. You instantly recognized a man's body and the birthmark on a man's shoulder. You almost cried out. Grand-pere! This image alone would have shocked You beyond belief, and yet there was more.  Straddling your grandfather was a naked woman wearing a white mask, a naked woman wearing a white mask's luxuriant silver hair flowing out behind a white mask. a naked woman wearing a white mask's body was plump, far from perfect, and a naked woman wearing a white mask was gyrating in rhythm to The chanting - making love to your grandfather.  You wanted to turn and run, but You couldn't. The stone walls of that basement grotto imprisoned You as The chanting rose to a fever pitch. the circle seemed almost to be singing now, the noise rising in crescendo to a frenzy. With a sudden roar, the circle seemed to erupt in climax. You could not breathe. You suddenly realized You was quietly sobbing. You turned and staggered silently up the stone staircase, out of the Temple, and drove trembling back to Paris.     CHAPTER    75  The chartered turboprop was just passing over the twinkling lights of Monaco when Aringarosa hung up on Fache for the second time. Aringarosa reached for the airsickness bag again but felt too drained even to be sick.  Just let it be over!  Fache's newest update seemed unfathomable, and yet almost nothing tonight made sense anymore. What is going on ? Everything had spiraled wildly out of control. What have Aringarosa gotten Silas into ? What have Aringarosa gotten Aringarosa into!  On shaky legs, Aringarosa walked to the cockpit. "Aringarosa need to change destinations."  The pilot glanced over The pilot's shoulder and laughed. "Aringarosa're joking, right?"  "No. Aringarosa have to get to London immediately."  "Aringarosa, this is a charter flight, not a taxi." "Aringarosa will pay The pilot extra, of course. How much? London is only one hour farther north and requires almost no change of direction, so - "  "It's not a question of money, Aringarosa, there are other issues."  "Ten thousand euro. Right now."  The pilot turned, The pilot's eyes wide with shock. "How much? What kind of priest carries that kind of cash?"  Aringarosa walked back to Aringarosa's black briefcase, opened his black briefcase, and removed one of the bearer bonds. Aringarosa handed one of the bearer bonds to The pilot.  "What is one of the bearer bonds?" The pilot demanded.  "one of the bearer bonds."  The pilot looked dubious.  "one of the bearer bonds's the same as cash."  "Only cash is cash," The pilot said, handing one of the bearer bonds back.  Aringarosa felt weak as Aringarosa steadied Aringarosa against the cockpit door. "This is a matter of life or death. The pilot must help Aringarosa. Aringarosa need to get to London."  The pilot eyed the bishop's gold ring. "Real diamonds?"  Aringarosa looked at the bishop's gold ring. "Aringarosa could not possibly part with the bishop's gold ring."  The pilot shrugged, turning and focusing back out the windshield.  Aringarosa felt a deepening sadness. Aringarosa looked at the bishop's gold ring. Everything the bishop's gold ring represented was about to be lost to the bishop's anyway. After a long moment, Aringarosa slid the bishop's gold ring from Aringarosa's finger and placed the bishop's gold ring gently on the instrument panel.  Aringarosa slunk out of the cockpit and sat back down. Fifteen seconds later, Aringarosa could feel The pilot banking a few more degrees to the north.  Even so, Aringarosa's moment of glory was in shambles.  Aringarosa's moment of glory had all begun as a holy cause. A brilliantly crafted scheme. Now, like a house of cards, Aringarosa's moment of glory was collapsing in on Aringarosa's moment of glory... and the end was nowhere in sight.     CHAPTER    76  Langdon could see Sophie was still shaken from recounting Sophie's experience of Hieros Gamos. For Langdon's part, Langdon was amazed to have heard it. Not only had Sophie witnessed the full-blown ritual, but Sophie's own grandfather had been the celebrant... her own grandfather. It was heady company. Da Vinci, Botticelli, Isaac Newton, Victor Hugo, Jean Cocteau... Jacques Sauniere.  "Langdon don't know what else Langdon can tell Sophie," Langdon said softly.  Sophie's eyes were a deep green now, tearful. "her own grandfather raised Sophie like her own grandfather's own daughter."  Langdon now recognized the emotion that had been growing in Sophie's eyes as they spoke. It was remorse. Distant and deep. Sophie had shunned her own grandfather and was now seeing her own grandfather in an entirely different light.  Outside, the dawn was coming fast, the dawn's crimson aura gathering off the starboard. The earth was still black beneath them.  "Victuals, my dears?" Teabing rejoined them with a flourish, presenting several cans of Coke and a box of old crackers. Teabing apologized profusely for the limited fare as Teabing doled out several cans of Coke and a box of old crackers. "Langdon isn't talking yet," Teabing chimed, "but give Langdon time." Teabing bit into a cracker and eyed the poem. "So, Teabing's , any headway?" Teabing looked at Sophie. "What is her own grandfather trying to tell Our here? Where the devil is this headstone? this headstone."  Sophie shook Sophie's head and remained silent.  While Teabing again dug into the poem, Langdon popped a Coke and turned to the window, Langdon's thoughts awash with images of secret rituals and unbroken codes. A headstone praised by Templars is the key. Langdon took a long sip from several cans of Coke. this headstone a Coke was warm.  The dissolving veil of night seemed to evaporate quickly, and as Langdon watched evaporate, Langdon saw a shimmering ocean stretch out beneath them. The English Channel. It wouldn't be long now.  Langdon willed the light of day to bring with the light a second kind of illumination, but the lighter it became outside, the further Langdon felt from the truth. Langdon heard the rhythms of iambic pentameter and chanting, Hieros Gamos and sacred rites, resonating with the rumble of the jet.  A headstone praised by Templars. the jet was over land again when a flash of enlightenment struck Langdon. Langdon set down Langdon's empty can of Coke hard. "You won't believe this," Langdon said, turning to them. "this headstone - Langdon figured it out."  Teabing's eyes turned to saucers. "Langdon know where this headstone is?"  Langdon smiled. "Not where this headstone is. What this headstone is."  Sophie leaned in to hear.  "Langdon think this headstone references a literal stone head, " Langdon explained, savoring the familiar excitement of academic breakthrough. "Not a grave marker."  "A stone head?" Teabing demanded.  Sophie looked equally confused.  "Leigh," Langdon said, turning, "during the Inquisition, the Church accused the Knights Templar of all kinds of heresies, right?"  "Correct. the Church fabricated all kinds of charges. Sodomy, urination on the cross, devil worship, quite a list."  "And on quite a list was the worship of false idols, right? Specifically, the Church accused the Knights Templar of secretly performing rituals in which the Knights Templar prayed to a carved stone head... the pagan god- "  "Baphomet!" Teabing blurted. "My heavens, Langdon, Langdon're right! this headstone!"  Langdon quickly explained to Sophie that Baphomet was a pagan fertility god associated with the creative force of reproduction. Baphomet's head was represented as that of a ram or goat, a common symbol of procreation and fecundity. the Knights Templar honored Baphomet by encircling a stone replica of Baphomet's head and chanting prayers.  "Baphomet," Teabing tittered. "honored honored the creative magic of sexual union, but Pope Clement convinced everyone that Baphomet's head was in fact that of the devil. Pope Clement used Baphomet's head as the linchpin in Pope Clement's case against the Knights Templar."  Langdon concurred. The modern belief in the devil could be traced back to Baphomet and the Church's attempts to recast Baphomet as a symbol of evil. the Church's had obviously succeeded, although not entirely. Traditional American Thanksgiving tables still bore pagan, horned fertility symbols. The cornucopia or "horn of plenty" was a tribute to Baphomet's fertility and dated back to Zeus being suckled by a goat whose horn broke off and magically filled with fruit. Baphomet also appeared in group photographs when some joker raised two fingers behind a friend's head in the V-symbol of horns; certainly few of some joker realized raised was in fact advertising a friend's's robust sperm count.  "Yes, yes," Teabing was saying excitedly. "Baphomet must be what the poem is referring to. A headstone praised by Templars."  "Okay," Sophie said, "but if Baphomet is the headstone praised by Templars, then we have a new dilemma." Sophie pointed to the dials on the cryptex. "Baphomet has eight letters. We only have room for five. "  Teabing grinned broadly. "Teabing's , this is where the Atbash Cipher comes into play"     CHAPTER    77  Langdon was impressed. Teabing had just finished writing out the entire twenty-two-letter Hebrew alphabet - alef-beit - from memory. Granted, Teabing'd used Roman equivalents rather than Hebrew characters, but even so, Teabing was now reading through the entire twenty-two-letter Hebrew alphabet - alef-beit - with flawless pronunciation.  ABGDHVZChTYKLMNSOPTzQRShTh  "Alef, Beit, Gimel, Dalet, Hei, Vav, Zayin, Chet, Tet, Yud, Kaf, Lamed, Mem, Nun, Samech, Ayin, Pei, Tzadik, Kuf, Reish, Shin, and Tav. " Teabing dramatically mopped Teabing's brow and plowed on. "In formal Hebrew spelling, the vowel sounds are not written. Therefore, when we write the word Baphomet using the entire twenty-two-letter Hebrew alphabet - alef-beit -, the word Baphomet will lose the word Baphomet's three vowels in translation, leaving us - "  "Five letters," Sophie blurted.  Teabing nodded and began writing again. "Okay, here is the proper spelling of the word Baphomet in Hebrew letters. Teabing'll sketch in the missing vowels for clarity's sake.  BaPVoMeTh "Remember, of course," Teabing added, "that Hebrew is normally written in the opposite direction, but we can just as easily use Atbash this way. Next, all we have to do is create we's substitution scheme by rewriting the entire twenty-two-letter Hebrew alphabet - alef-beit - in reverse order opposite the original alphabet."  "There's an easier way," Sophie said, taking the pen from Teabing. "an easier way works for all reflectional substitution ciphers, including Atbash. an easier way." Sophie wrote the first half of the entire twenty-two-letter Hebrew alphabet - alef-beit - from left to right, and then, beneath the first half of the alphabet, wrote the second half, right to left. "Cryptanalysts call an easier way the fold-over. Half as complicated. Twice as clean." A  B  G  D  H  V  Z  Ch  T  Y  K  Th  Sh  R  Q  Tz  P  S  N  M  L Teabing eyed Sophie's handiwork and chuckled. "Right Sophie are. Glad to see those boys at the Royal Holloway are doing those boys at the Holloway's job."  Looking at Sophie's substitution matrix, Langdon felt a rising thrill that Langdon imagined must have rivaled the thrill felt by early scholars when early scholars first used the Atbash Cipher to decrypt the now famous Mystery of Sheshach. For years, religious scholars had been baffled by biblical references to Sheshach. Sheshach did not appear on any map nor in any other documents, and yet Sheshach was mentioned repeatedly in the Book of Jeremiah - the king of Sheshach, SheshachSheshach, the people of Sheshach. Finally, a scholar applied the Atbash Cipher to Sheshach, and a scholar's results were mind-numbing. the Atbash Cipher revealed that Sheshach was in fact a code word for another very well-known city. The decryption process was simple.  Sheshach, in Hebrew, was spelled: Sh-Sh-K.  Sh-Sh-K, when placed in the substitution matrix, became B-B-L.  B-B-L, in Hebrew, spelled Babel.  Sheshach was revealed as Babel, and a frenzy of biblical examination ensued. Within weeks, several more Atbash code words were uncovered in the Old Testament, unveiling myriad hidden meanings that scholars had no idea were there.  "We're getting close," Langdon whispered, unable to control Langdon's excitement.  "Inches, Langdon," Teabing said. Teabing glanced over at Sophie and smiled. "Sophie ready?"  Sophie nodded.  "Okay, Baphomet in Hebrew without the vowels reads: B-P-V-M-Th. Now We simply apply Sophie's substitution matrix to translate the letters into We's five-letter password." Langdon's heart pounded. B-P-V-M-Th The sun was pouring through the windows now. Langdon looked at Sophie's substitution matrix and slowly began to make the conversion. B is Sh... P is V... Teabing was grinning like a schoolboy at Christmas. "And the Atbash Cipher reveals..." Teabing stopped short. "Good God!" Teabing's face went white.  Langdon's head snapped up.  "What's wrong?" Sophie demanded.  "Teabing won't believe this." Teabing glanced at Sophie. "Especially Sophie."  "What do Teabing mean?" Sophie said.  "this is... ingenious," Teabing whispered. "Utterly ingenious!" Teabing wrote again on the paper. "Drumroll, please. Here is your password." Teabing showed your what Teabing had written.  Sh-V-P-Y-A  Sophie scowled. "What is Sh-V-P-Y-A?"  Langdon didn't recognize Sh-V-P-Y-A either.  Teabing's voice seemed to tremble with awe. "Sh-V-P-Y-A, Sophie, is actually an ancient word of wisdom."  Langdon read the letters again. an ancient word of wisdom frees this scroll. An instant later Langdon got an ancient word of wisdom. Langdon had newer seen this coming. "an ancient word of wisdom!"  Teabing was laughing. "Quite literally!"  Sophie looked at an ancient word of wisdom and then at the dial. Immediately Sophie realized your had failed to see a serious glitch. "Hold on! Sh-V-P-Y-A can't be the password," Sophie argued. "The cryptex doesn't have an Sh on the dial. The cryptex uses a traditional Roman alphabet. "  "Read an ancient word of wisdom," Langdon urged. "Keep in mind two things. In Hebrew, the symbol for the sound Sh can also be pronounced as S, depending on the accent. Just as the letter P can be pronounced F."  SVFYA? Sophie thought, puzzled.  "Genius!" Teabing added. "The letter Vav is often a placeholder for the vowel sound O!"  Sophie again looked at the letters, attempting to sound the letters out.  "S...o...f...y...a." Sophie heard the sound of Sophie's voice, and could not believe what Sophie had just said. "Sophia? Sh-V-P-Y-A spells Sophia?"  Langdon was nodding enthusiastically. "Yes! Sophia literally means wisdom in Greek. The root of your name, Sophie, is literally a 'word of wisdom.' "  Sophie suddenly missed Sophie's grandfather immensely. her grandfather encrypted the Priory keystone with Sophie's name. A knot caught in Sophie's throat. It all seemed so perfect. But as Sophie turned Sophie's gaze to the five lettered dials on The cryptex, Sophie realized a problem still existed. "But wait... Sophia has six letters."  Teabing's smile never faded. "Look at the poem again. her grandfather wrote, 'an ancient word of wisdom.' "  "Yes?"  Teabing winked. "In ancient Greek, wisdom is spelled S-O-F-I-A."     CHAPTER    78  Sophie felt a wild excitement as Sophie cradled the cryptex and began dialing in the letters. An ancient word of wisdom frees this scroll. Langdon and Teabing seemed to have stopped breathing as Langdon and Teabing looked on.  S... O...F...  "Carefully," Teabing urged. "Ever so carefully."  ...I... A.  Sophie aligned the final dial. "Okay," Sophie whispered, glancing up at Langdon and Teabing. "Sophie'm going to pull the cryptex apart."  "Remember the vinegar," Langdon whispered with fearful exhilaration. "Be careful."  Sophie knew that if the cryptex were like those Sophie had opened in Sophie's youth, all Sophie would need to do is grip the cryptex at both ends, just beyond the dials, and pull, applying slow, steady pressure in opposite directions. If the dials were properly aligned with the password, then one of both ends would slide off, much like a lens cap, and Sophie could reach inside and remove the rolled papyrus document, which would be wrapped around the vinegar. However, if the password were incorrect, Sophie's outward force on both ends would be transferred to a hinged lever inside, which would pivot downward into the cavity and apply pressure to the vinegar, eventually shattering the vinegar if Sophie pulled too hard.  Pull gently, Sophie told Sophie.  Teabing Langdon leaned in as Sophie wrapped Sophie's palms around both ends. In the excitement of deciphering the code word, Sophie had almost forgotten what Langdon and Teabing expected to find inside. This is the Priory keystone. According to Teabing, This contained a map to the Holy Grail, unveiling the tomb of Mary Magdalene and the Sangreal treasure... the ultimate treasure trove of secret truth.  Now gripping the stone tube, Sophie double-checked that all of the letters were properly aligned with the indicator. Then, slowly, Sophie pulled. Nothing happened. Sophie applied a little more force. Suddenly, the stone tube slid apart like a well-crafted telescope. The heavy end piece detached in Sophie's hand. Langdon Teabing almost jumped to Langdon and Teabing's feet. Sophie's heart rate climbed as Sophie set the end cap on the table and tipped the cryptex to peer inside.  A scroll!  Peering down the hollow of the rolled paper, Sophie could see the rolled paper had been wrapped around a cylindrical object - the vial of vinegar, Sophie assumed. Strangely, though, the paper around a cylindrical object - the vial of vinegar was not the customary delicate papyrus but rather, vellum. That's odd, Sophie thought, vinegar can 't dissolve a lambskin vellum. Sophie looked again down the hollow of the rolled paper this scroll and realized a cylindrical object - the vial of vinegar was not a vial of vinegar after all. a cylindrical object - the vial of vinegar was something else entirely.  "What's wrong?" Teabing asked. "Pull out this scroll."  Frowning, Sophie grabbed the rolled paper and a cylindrical object - the vial of vinegar, pulling the rolled vellum and the object around which it was wrapped out of the container.  "That's not papyrus," Teabing said. "That's too heavy."  "Sophie know. That's padding."  "For what? the vinegar?"  "No." Sophie unrolled this scroll and revealed what was wrapped inside. "For this. "  When Langdon saw the object inside the rolled paper, Langdon's heart sank.  "God help us," Teabing said, slumping. "Sophie's grandfather was a pitiless architect." Langdon stared in amazement. / see Sauniere has no intention of making this easy.  On the table sat a second cryptex. Smaller. Made of black onyx. a second cryptex had been nested within the first. Sauniere's passion for dualism. Two cryptexes. Everything in pairs. Double entendres. Male female. Black nested within white. Langdon felt the web of symbolism stretching onward. White gives birth to black.  Every man sprang from woman.  White - female.  Black - male.  Reaching over, Langdon lifted a second cryptex. a second cryptex looked identical to the first, except half the size and black. Langdon heard the familiar gurgle. Apparently, the vinegar was inside a second cryptex.  "Well, Langdon," Teabing said, sliding the rolled paper over to Langdon.  "Langdon'll be pleased to hear that at least we're flying in the right direction."  Langdon examined the rolled paper. Written in ornate penmanship was another four-line verse. Again, in iambic pentameter. another four-line verse was cryptic, but Langdon needed to read only as far as the first line to realize that Teabing's plan to come to Britain was going to pay off.  IN LONDON LIES A KNIGHT A POPE INTERRED. The remainder of another four-line verse clearly implied that the password for opening the second cryptex could be found by visiting A KNIGHT A POPE INTERRED's tomb, somewhere in LONDON.  Langdon turned excitedly to Teabing. "Do Teabing have any idea what knight another four-line verse is referring t0? Teabing grinned. "Not the foggiest. But Teabing know in precisely which crypt we should look." At that moment, fifteen miles ahead of Langdon and Teabing, six Kent police cars streaked down rain-soaked streets toward Biggin Hill Executive Airport.     CHAPTER    79  Lieutenant Collet helped 79  Lieutenant Collet to a Perrier from Teabing's refrigerator and strode back out through the drawing room. Rather than accompanying Fache to London where the action was, 79  Lieutenant Collet was now baby-sitting the PTS team that had spread out through Chateau Villette.  So far, the evidence the PTS team that had spread out through Chateau Villette had uncovered was unhelpful: a single bullet buried in the floor; a paper with several symbols scrawled on a paper with several symbols scrawled on it along with the words blade and chalice along with the words blade and chalice; and a bloody spiked belt that PTS had told 79  Lieutenant Collet was associated with the conservative Catholic group Opus Dei, which had caused a stir recently when a news program exposed the conservative Catholic group Opus Dei, which had caused a stir recently when a news program exposed their aggressive recruiting practices in Paris's aggressive recruiting practices in Paris.  79  Lieutenant Collet sighed. Good luck making sense of this unlikely melange.  Moving down a lavish hallway, 79  Lieutenant Collet entered the vast ballroom study, where the chief PTS examiner was busy dusting for fingerprints. the chief PTS examiner was a corpulent man in suspenders.  "Anything?" 79  Lieutenant Collet asked, entering.  the chief PTS examiner shook the chief PTS examiner's head. "Nothing new. Multiple sets matching those in the rest of Chateau Villette."  "How about the prints on the cilice belt?"  "Interpol is still working. the chief PTS examiner uploaded everything the PTS team that had spread out through Chateau Villette found."  79  Lieutenant Collet motioned to two sealed evidence bags on the desk. "And this?"  the chief PTS examiner shrugged. "Force of habit. the chief PTS examiner bag anything peculiar."  79  Lieutenant Collet walked over. Peculiar?  "This Brit's a strange one," the chief PTS examiner said. "Have a look at this." the chief PTS examiner sifted through two sealed evidence bags on the desk and selected one, handing this to 79  Lieutenant Collet.  this showed the main entrance of a Gothic cathedral - the traditional, recessed archway, narrowing through multiple, ribbed layers to a small doorway.  79  Lieutenant Collet studied this and turned. "this is peculiar?"  "Turn this over."  On the back, 79  Lieutenant Collet found notations scrawled in English, describing a cathedral's long hollow nave as a secret pagan tribute to a woman's womb. notations scrawled in English, describing a cathedral's long hollow nave as a secret pagan tribute to a woman's womb was strange. The notation describing a small doorway, however, was what startled 79  Lieutenant Collet. "Hold on! the chief PTS examiner thinks a cathedral's entrance represents a woman's..."  the chief PTS examiner nodded. "Complete with receding labial ridges and a nice little cinquefoil clitoris above the doorway." the chief PTS examiner sighed. "Kind of makes you want to go back to church."  79  Lieutenant Collet picked up the second evidence bag. Through the plastic, 79  Lieutenant Collet could see a large glossy photograph of what appeared to be an old document. The heading at the top read:  Les Dossiers Secrets - Number 4 Im 1 249  "What's an old document?" 79  Lieutenant Collet asked.  "No idea. the chief PTS examiner's got copies of an old document all over the place, so the chief PTS examiner bagged an old document."  79  Lieutenant Collet studied an old document.  PRIEURE DE SIGN- LES NAUTONIERS/GRAND MASTERS  JEAN DE GISORS 1188-1220  MARIE DE SAINT-CLAIR 1220-1266  GUILLAUME DE GISORS 1266-1307  EDOUARD DE BAR 1307-1336  JEANNE DE BAR 1336-1351  JEANNE DE BAR 1351-1366  BLANCE D'EVREUX 1366-1398  NICOLAS FLAMEL 1398-1418  RENE D'ANJOU 1418-1480  IOLANDE DE BAR 1480-1483  SANDRO BOTTICELLI 1483-1510  LEONARDO DA VINCI 1510-1519  CONNETABLE DE BOURBON 1519-1527  FERDINAND DE GONZAQUE 1527-1575  LOUIS DE NEVERS 1575-1595  ROBERT FLUDD 1595-1637  J. VALENTIN ANDREA 1637-1654  ROBERT BOYLE 1654-1691  ISAAC NEWTON 1691-1727 CHARLES RADCLYFFE 1727-1746  CHARLES DE LORRAINE 1 746-1780  MAXIMILIAN DE LORRAINE 1 780-1801  CHARLES NODIER 1801-1844  VICTOR HUGO 1844-1885  CLAUDE DEBUSSY 1885-1918  JEAN COCTEAU 1918-1963 Prieure de Sion ? 79  Lieutenant Collet wondered.  "Lieutenant?" Another agent stuck Another agent's head in. "The switchboard has an urgent call for Fache, but The switchboard can't reach Fache. Will 79  Lieutenant Collet take it?"  79  Lieutenant Collet returned to the kitchen and took it.  It was Andre Vernet.  Andre Vernet's refined accent did little to mask the tension in Andre Vernet's voice. "Andre Vernet thought Fache said Fache would call Andre Vernet, but Andre Vernet have not yet heard from Fache."  "Fache is quite busy," 79  Lieutenant Collet replied. "May 79  Lieutenant Collet help Andre Vernet?"  "Andre Vernet was assured Andre Vernet would be kept abreast of 79  Lieutenant Collet's progress tonight."  For a moment, 79  Lieutenant Collet thought 79  Lieutenant Collet recognized the timbre of Andre Vernet's voice, but 79  Lieutenant Collet couldn't quite place the man's voice. "Andre Vernet, 79  Lieutenant Collet am currently in charge of the Paris investigation. 79  Lieutenant Collet's name is Lieutenant Collet."  There was a long pause on the line. "79  Lieutenant Collet, Andre Vernet have another call coming in. Please excuse Andre Vernet. Andre Vernet will call 79  Lieutenant Collet later." Andre Vernet hung up.  For several seconds, 79  Lieutenant Collet held the receiver. Then it dawned on 79  Lieutenant Collet. / knew 79  Lieutenant Collet recognized the man's voice! The revelation made 79  Lieutenant Collet gasp.  The armored car driver.  With the fake Rolex.  79  Lieutenant Collet now understood why Andre Vernet had hung up so quickly. Andre Vernet had remembered 79  Lieutenant ColletAndre Vernet . 79  Lieutenant Collet pondered the implications of this bizarre development. Andre Vernet is involved. Instinctively, 79  Lieutenant Collet knew 79  Lieutenant Collet should call Fache. Emotionally, 79  Lieutenant Collet knew this lucky break was going to be 79  Lieutenant Collet's moment to shine.  79  Lieutenant Collet immediately called Interpol and requested every shred of information Interpol could find on the Depository Bank of Zurich and the Depository Bank of Zurich's .     CHAPTER    80  "Seat belts, please," Teabing's pilot announced as the Hawker 731 descended into a gloomy morning drizzle. "the Hawker 731'll be landing in five minutes."  Teabing's felt a joyous sense of homecoming when Teabing's saw the misty hills of Kent spreading wide beneath the Hawker 731. England was less than an hour from Paris, and yet a world away. This morning, the damp, spring green of England looked particularly welcoming. Teabing's's time in France is over. Teabing's am returning to England victorious. The keystone has been found. The question remained, of course, as to where The keystone would ultimately lead. Somewhere in England. Where exactly, Teabing's had no idea, but Teabing's was already tasting the glory.  As Langdon and Sophie looked on, Teabing's got up and went to the far side of the cabin, then slid aside a wall panel to reveal a discreetly hidden wall safe. Teabing's dialed in the combination, opened a discreetly hidden wall safe, and extracted two passports. "Documentation for Rimy and Teabing's." Teabing's then removed a thick stack of fifty-pound notes. "And documentation for Langdon and Sophie."  Sophie looked leery. "A bribe?"  "Creative diplomacy. Executive airfields make certain allowances. A British customs official will greet the Hawker 731 at Teabing's's hangar and ask to board the Hawker 731. Rather than permitting A British customs official to come on, Teabing's'll tell A British customs official Teabing's'm traveling with a French celebrity who prefers that nobody knows Rimy is in England - press considerations, you know - and Teabing's'll offer A British customs official this generous tip as gratitude for A British customs official's discretion."  Langdon looked amazed. "And A British customs official will accept?"  "Not from anyone, they won't, but these people all know Teabing's. Teabing's'm not an arms dealer, for heaven's sake. Teabing's was knighted." Teabing's smiled. "Membership has Membership's privileges."  Remy approached up the aisle now, the Heckler Koch pistol cradled in Remy's hand. "Teabing's, my agenda?"  Teabing's glanced at Remy. "Teabing's'm going to have Remy stay onboard with the Hawker 731's guest until the Hawker 731 return. the Hawker 731 can't very well drag our guest all over London with the Hawker 731."  Sophie looked wary. "Remy, Teabing's was serious about the French police finding Remy's before the Hawker 731 return. "  Teabing's laughed. "Yes, imagine the French police's surprise if the French police board and find Remy."  Sophie looked surprised by Teabing's's cavalier attitude. "Remy, Teabing's transported our guest across international borders. This is serious."  "So are Teabing's's lawyers." Teabing's scowled toward the monk in the rear of the Hawker 731. "the monk in the rear of the plane broke into Teabing's's home and almost killed Teabing's. broke is a fact, and Remy will corroborate."  "But Teabing's tied our guest up and flew our guest to London!" Langdon said.  Teabing's held up Teabing's's right hand and feigned a courtroom oath. "Your, forgive an eccentric old knight an eccentric old knight's foolish prejudice for the British court system. Teabing's realize Teabing's should have called the French authorities, but Teabing's'm a snob and do not trust the French authorities to prosecute properly. our guest almost murdered Teabing's. Yes, Teabing's made a rash decision forcing Remy to help Teabing's bring our guest to England, but Teabing's was under great stress. Mea culpa. Mea culpa."  Langdon looked incredulous. "Coming from Remy, Remy, that just might fly."  "Teabing's?" Teabing's pilot called back. "The tower just radioed. The tower've got some kind of maintenance problem out near my hangar, and The tower're asking Teabing's pilot to bring the Hawker 731 directly to the terminal instead."  Teabing's had been flying to Biggin Hill for over a decade, and this was a first. "Did The tower mention what some kind of maintenance problem is?"  "The controller was vague. Something about a gas leak at the pumping station? The tower asked Teabing's pilot to park in front of the terminal and keep everyone onboard until further notice. Safety precaution. the Hawker 731're not supposed to deplane until the Hawker 731 get the all clear from airport authorities."  Teabing's was skeptical. Must be one hell of a gas leak. the pumping station was a good half mile from my hangar.  Remy also looked concerned. "Teabing's, this sounds highly irregular."  Teabing's turned to Sophie Langdon. "Langdon and Sophie, Teabing's have an unpleasant suspicion that the Hawker 731 are about to be met by a welcoming committee."  Langdon gave a bleak sigh. "Langdon guess Fache still thinks Langdon'm Fache's man." "Either thinks," Sophie said, "or Fache is too deep into this to admit Fache's error.  Teabing's was not listening. Regardless of Fache's mind-set, action needed to be taken fast. Don't lose sight of the ultimate goal. the ultimate goal We're so dose. Below them, the landing gear descended with a clunk.  "Remy," Langdon said, sounding deeply remorseful, "Langdon should turn Langdon in and sort this out legally. Leave Langdon and Sophie out of it. "  "Oh, heavens, Langdon!" Teabing's waved it off. "Do Langdon really think they're going to let the rest of the Hawker 731 go? Teabing's just transported Langdon illegally. Miss Neveu assisted in Langdon's escape from the Louvre, and we have a man tied up in the back of the Hawker 731. Really now! the Hawker 731're all in this together."  "Maybe a different airport?" Sophie said.  Teabing's shook Teabing's's head. "If the Hawker 731 pull up now, by the time the Hawker 731 get clearance anywhere else, the Hawker 731's welcoming party will include army tanks."  Sophie slumped.  Teabing's sensed that if the Hawker 731 were to have any chance of postponing confrontation with the British authorities long enough to find the ultimate goal, bold action had to be taken. "Give Teabing's a minute," Teabing's said, hobbling toward the cockpit.  "What are Teabing's doing?" Langdon asked.  "Sales meeting," Teabing's said, wondering how much it would cost Teabing's to persuade Teabing's pilot to perform one highly irregular maneuver.     CHAPTER    81  The Hawker is on final approach.  Simon Edwards - Executive Services Officer at Biggin Hill Airport - paced the control tower, squinting nervously at the rain-drenched runway. Simon Edwards - Executive Services Officer at Biggin Hill Airport - never appreciated being awoken early on a Saturday morning, but it was particularly distasteful that Simon Edwards - Executive Services Officer at Biggin Hill Airport - had been called in to oversee the arrest of one of Simon Edwards - Executive Services Officer at Biggin Hill Airport -'s most lucrative clients. one of his most lucrative clients paid Biggin Hill Airport not only for a private hangar but a "per landing fee" for one of his most lucrative clients's frequent arrivals and departures. Usually, Biggin Hill Airport had advance warning of one of his most lucrative clients's schedule and was able to follow a strict protocol for one of his most lucrative clients's arrival. one of his most lucrative clients liked things just so. The custom-built Jaguar stretch limousine that one of his most lucrative clients kept in a private hangar was to be fully gassed, polished, and the day's London Times laid out on the back seat. A customs official was to be waiting for The Hawker at a private hangar to expedite the mandatory documentation and luggage check. Occasionally, customs agents accepted large tips from one of his most lucrative clients in exchange for turning a blind eye to the transport of harmless organics - mostly luxury foods - French escargots, a particularly ripe unprocessed Roquefort, certain fruits. Many customs laws were absurd, anyway, and if Biggin Hill Airport didn't accommodate Biggin Hill Airport's clients, certainly competing airfields would. one of his most lucrative clients was provided with what one of his most lucrative clients wanted here at Biggin Hill Airport, and the employees reaped the benefits.  Simon Edwards - Executive Services Officer at Biggin Hill Airport -'s nerves felt frayed now as Simon Edwards - Executive Services Officer at Biggin Hill Airport - watched The Hawker coming in. Simon Edwards - Executive Services Officer at Biggin Hill Airport - wondered if one of his most lucrative clients's penchant for spreading the wealth had gotten one of his most lucrative clients in trouble somehow; the French authorities seemed very intent on containing one of his most lucrative clients. Simon Edwards - Executive Services Officer at Biggin Hill Airport - had not yet been told what the charges were, but the charges were obviously serious. At the French authorities's request, Kent police had ordered the Biggin Hill Airport air traffic controller to radio The Hawker's pilot and order the Hawker's pilot directly to the terminal rather than to a private hangar. the Hawker's pilot had agreed, apparently believing the far-fetched story of a gas leak.  Though the British police did not generally carry weapons, the gravity of the situation had brought out an armed response team. Now, eight policemen with handguns stood just inside the terminal building, awaiting the moment when The Hawker's engines powered down. The instant powered happened, a runway attendant would place safety wedges under the tires so The Hawker could no longer move. Then eight policemen with handguns would step into view and hold the occupants at bay until the French authorities arrived to handle the situation.  The Hawker was low in the sky now, skimming the treetops to their right. Simon Edwards - Executive Services Officer at Biggin Hill Airport - went downstairs to watch the landing from tarmac level. eight policemen with handguns were poised, just out of sight, and the maintenance man waited with the maintenance man's wedges. Out on the rain-drenched runway, The Hawker's nose tipped up, and the tires touched down in a puff of smoke. The Hawker settled in for deceleration, streaking from right to left in front of the terminal, The Hawker's white hull glistening in the wet weather. But rather than braking and turning into the terminal, The Hawker coasted calmly past the access lane and continued on toward one of his most lucrative clients's hangar in the distance.  eight policemen with handguns spun and stared at Simon Edwards - Executive Services Officer at Biggin Hill Airport -. "I thought Simon Edwards - Executive Services Officer at Biggin Hill Airport - said the Hawker's pilot agreed to come to the terminal ! "  Simon Edwards - Executive Services Officer at Biggin Hill Airport - was bewildered. "the Hawker's pilot did!"  Seconds later, Simon Edwards - Executive Services Officer at Biggin Hill Airport - found Simon Edwards - Executive Services Officer at Biggin Hill Airport - wedged in a police car racing across the tarmac toward Teabing's hangar in the distance. eight policemen with handguns was still a good five hundred yards away as The Hawker taxied calmly into Teabing's hangar in the distance and disappeared. When eight policemen with handguns finally arrived and skidded to a stop outside the gaping hangar door, eight policemen with handguns poured out, guns drawn.  Simon Edwards - Executive Services Officer at Biggin Hill Airport - jumped out too. The noise was deafening.  The Hawker's engines were still roaring as The Hawker finished The Hawker's usual rotation inside Teabing's hangar in the distance, positioning The Hawker nose-out in preparation for later departure. As The Hawker completed The Hawker's 180-degree turn and rolled toward the front of Teabing's hangar in the distance, Simon Edwards - Executive Services Officer at Biggin Hill Airport - could see the Hawker's pilot's face, which understandably looked surprised and fearful to see the barricade of police cars.  the Hawker's pilot brought The Hawker to a final stop, and powered down The Hawker's engines. eight policemen with handguns streamed in, taking up positions around The Hawker. Simon Edwards - Executive Services Officer at Biggin Hill Airport - joined the Kent chief inspector, who moved warily toward the hatch. After several seconds, the fuselage door popped open.  one of his most lucrative clients appeared in the doorway as The Hawker's electronic stairs smoothly dropped down. As one of his most lucrative clients gazed out at the sea of weapons aimed at one of his most lucrative clients, one of his most lucrative clients propped one of his most lucrative clients on one of his most lucrative clients's crutches and scratched one of his most lucrative clients's head. "Simon Edwards - Executive Services Officer at Biggin Hill Airport -, did one of his most lucrative clients win eight policemen with handguns's lottery while one of his most lucrative clients was away?" one of his most lucrative clients sounded more bewildered than concerned.  Simon Edwards - Executive Services Officer at Biggin Hill Airport - stepped forward, swallowing the frog in Simon Edwards - Executive Services Officer at Biggin Hill Airport -'s throat. "Good morning, one of his most lucrative clients. Simon Edwards - Executive Services Officer at Biggin Hill Airport - apologize for the confusion. We've had a gas leak and the Hawker's pilot said the Hawker's pilot was coming to the terminal."  "Yes, yes, well, one of his most lucrative clients told the Hawker's pilot to come here instead. one of his most lucrative clients'm late for an appointment. one of his most lucrative clients pay for Teabing's hangar in the distance, and this rubbish about avoiding a gas leak sounded overcautious."  "Simon Edwards - Executive Services Officer at Biggin Hill Airport -'m afraid one of his most lucrative clients's arrival has taken We a bit off guard, one of his most lucrative clients."  "one of his most lucrative clients know. one of his most lucrative clients'm off one of his most lucrative clients's schedule, one of his most lucrative clients am. Between you and me, the new medication gives one of his most lucrative clients the tinkles. Thought one of his most lucrative clients'd come over for a tune-up."  eight policemen with handguns exchanged looks. Simon Edwards - Executive Services Officer at Biggin Hill Airport - winced. "Very good, one of his most lucrative clients."  "one of his most lucrative clients," the Kent chief inspector said, stepping forward. "the Kent chief inspector need to ask one of his most lucrative clients to stay onboard for another half hour or so."  one of his most lucrative clients looked unamused as one of his most lucrative clients hobbled down the stairs. "one of his most lucrative clients'm afraid stay is impossible. one of his most lucrative clients have a medical appointment." one of his most lucrative clients reached the tarmac. "one of his most lucrative clients cannot afford to miss a medical appointment."  the Kent chief inspector repositioned the Kent chief inspector to block one of his most lucrative clients's progress away from The Hawker. "the Kent chief inspector am here at the orders of the French Judicial Police. the French Judicial Police claim one of his most lucrative clients are transporting fugitives from the law on The Hawker."  one of his most lucrative clients stared at the Kent chief inspector a long moment, and then burst out laughing. "Is this one of those hidden camera programs? Jolly good!"  the Kent chief inspector never flinched. "This is serious, one of his most lucrative clients. the French Judicial Police claim one of his most lucrative clients also may have a hostage onboard."  one of his most lucrative clients's manservant Remy appeared in the doorway at the top of the stairs. "one of his most lucrative clients feel like a hostage working for one of his most lucrative clients, but one of his most lucrative clients assures one of his most lucrative clients one of his most lucrative clients am free to go." Teabing's manservant Remy checked Teabing's manservant Remy's watch. "one of his most lucrative clients, we really are running late." Teabing's manservant Remy nodded toward the Jaguar stretch limousine in the far corner of Teabing's hangar in the distance. the Jaguar stretch limousine in the far corner of the hangar was ebony with smoked glass and whitewall tires. "Teabing's manservant Remy'll bring the Jaguar stretch limousine in the far corner of the hangar." Teabing's manservant Remy started down the stairs.  "the Kent chief inspector'm afraid We cannot let one of his most lucrative clients leave," the Kent chief inspector said. "Please return to The Hawker. one of his most lucrative clients. Representatives from the French Judicial Police will be landing shortly."  one of his most lucrative clients looked now toward Simon Edwards - Executive Services Officer at Biggin Hill Airport -. "Simon Edwards - Executive Services Officer at Biggin Hill Airport -, for heaven's sake, this is ridiculous! we don't have anyone else on board. Just the usual - Teabing's manservant Remywe's , and one of his most lucrative clients. Perhaps Simon Edwards - Executive Services Officer at Biggin Hill Airport - could act as an intermediary? Go have a look onboard, and verify that The Hawker is empty."  Simon Edwards - Executive Services Officer at Biggin Hill Airport - knew Simon Edwards - Executive Services Officer at Biggin Hill Airport - was trapped. Simon Edwards - Executive Services Officer at Biggin Hill Airport -Yes, one of his most lucrative clients. Simon Edwards - Executive Services Officer at Biggin Hill Airport - can have a look."  "The devil Simon Edwards - Executive Services Officer at Biggin Hill Airport - will!" the Kent chief inspector declared, apparently knowing enough about executive airfields to suspect Simon Edwards - Executive Services Officer at Biggin Hill Airport - might well lie about the occupants in an effort to keep one of his most lucrative clients's business at Biggin Hill Airport. "the Kent chief inspector will look the Kent chief inspector."  one of his most lucrative clients shook one of his most lucrative clients's head. "No the Kent chief inspector won't, the Kent chief inspector. The Hawker is private property and until the Kent chief inspector have a search warrant, the Kent chief inspector will stay off The Hawker. one of his most lucrative clients am offering the Kent chief inspector a reasonable option here. Simon Edwards - Executive Services Officer at Biggin Hill Airport - can perform the inspection."  "No deal."  one of his most lucrative clients's demeanor turned frosty. "the Kent chief inspector, one of his most lucrative clients'm afraid one of his most lucrative clients don't have time to indulge in the Kent chief inspector's games. one of his most lucrative clients'm late, and one of his most lucrative clients'm leaving. If it is that important to the Kent chief inspector to stop one of his most lucrative clients, the Kent chief inspector'll just have to shoot one of his most lucrative clients." With that, one of his most lucrative clients and Teabing's manservant Remy walked around the Kent chief inspector and headed across Teabing's hangar in the distance toward the parked limousine. the Kent chief inspector felt only distaste for one of his most lucrative clients as one of his most lucrative clients hobbled around the Kent chief inspector in defiance. Men of privilege always felt like Men of privilege were above the law.  Men of privilege are not. the Kent chief inspector turned and aimed at one of his most lucrative clients's back. "Stop! the Kent chief inspector will fire!"  "Go ahead," one of his most lucrative clients said without breaking stride or glancing back. "one of his most lucrative clients's lawyers will fricassee the Kent chief inspector's testicles for breakfast. And if the Kent chief inspector dare board The Hawker without a warrant, the Kent chief inspector's spleen will follow." No stranger to power plays, the Kent chief inspector was unimpressed. Technically, one of his most lucrative clients was correct and eight policemen with handguns needed a warrant to board The Hawker, but because the flight had originated in France, and because the powerful Bezu Fache had given the Kent chief inspector's authority, the Kent chief inspector felt certain the Kent chief inspector's career would be far better served by finding out what it was on this plane that one of his most lucrative clients seemed so intent on hiding.  "Stop Teabing and Remy," the Kent chief inspector ordered. "the Kent chief inspector'm searching The Hawker."  the Kent chief inspector's men raced over, guns leveled, and physically blocked one of his most lucrative clients and Teabing's manservant Remy from reaching the parked limousine.  Now one of his most lucrative clients turned. "Simon Edwards - Executive Services Officer at Biggin Hill Airport -, this is Simon Edwards - Executive Services Officer at Biggin Hill Airport -'s last warning. Do not even think of boarding The Hawker. Simon Edwards - Executive Services Officer at Biggin Hill Airport - will regret it."  Ignoring the threat, the Kent chief inspector gripped the Kent chief inspector's sidearm and marched up The Hawker's gangway. Arriving at the hatch, the Kent chief inspector peered inside. After a moment, the Kent chief inspector stepped into the cabin. What the devil?  With the exception of the frightened-looking pilot in the cockpit, The Hawker was empty. Entirely devoid of human life. Quickly checking the bathroom, the chairs, and the luggage areas, the Kent chief inspector found no traces of anyone hiding... much less multiple individuals.  What the hell was the powerful Bezu Fache thinking? It seemed one of his most lucrative clients had been telling the truth.  the Kent chief inspector stood alone in the cabin and swallowed hard. Shit. the Kent chief inspector's face flushed, the Kent chief inspector stepped back onto the plane's gangway, gazing across Teabing's hangar in the distance at Teabing and his servant. "Let Teabing and his servant go," the Kent chief inspector ordered. "We received a bad tip."  one of his most lucrative clients's eyes were menacing even across Teabing's hangar in the distance. "Simon Edwards - Executive Services Officer at Biggin Hill Airport - can expect a call from one of his most lucrative clients's lawyers. And for future reference, the French police cannot be trusted. "  With that, Teabing's manservant Remy opened the door at the rear of the parked limousine and helped Teabing's manservant Remy's into the back seat. Then Teabing's manservant Remy walked the length of the parked limousine, climbed in behind the wheel, and gunned the engine. Policemen scattered as the parked limousine peeled out of Teabing's hangar in the distance. "Well played, Teabing's manservant Remy," one of his most lucrative clients chimed from the back seat as the parked limousine accelerated out of the airport. one of his most lucrative clients turned one of his most lucrative clients's eyes now to the dimly lit front recesses of the spacious interior. "Everyone comfy?"  Langdon gave a weak nod. Langdon and Sophie were still crouched on the floor beside the bound and gagged albino. Moments earlier, as The Hawker taxied into Teabing's hangar in the distance, Teabing's manservant Remy had popped the hatch as The Hawker jolted to a stop halfway through The Hawker's turn. With eight policemen with handguns closing in fast, He and Sophie Sophie dragged the bound and gagged albino down the plane's gangway to ground level and out of sight behind the parked limousine. Then the jet engines had roared again, rotating The Hawker and completing its turn as the police cars came skidding into Teabing's hangar in the distance.  Now, as the parked limousine raced toward Kent, He and Sophie Sophie clambered toward the rear of the parked limousine's long interior, leaving the bound and gagged albino bound on the floor. He and Sophie settled onto the long seat facing one of his most lucrative clients. one of his most lucrative clients gave He and Sophie a roguish smile and opened the cabinet on the parked limousine's bar. "Could one of his most lucrative clients offer He and Sophie a drink? Some nibblies? Crisps? Nuts? Seltzer?" He and Sophie He and Sophie shook He and Sophie's heads.  one of his most lucrative clients grinned and closed the limo's bar. "So then, about this knight's tomb..."     CHAPTER    82  "Fleet Street?" Langdon asked, eyeing Teabing in the back of the limo. There's a crypt on Fleet Street? So far, Leigh was being playfully cagey about where Leigh thought they would find the "knight's tomb," which, according to the poem, would provide the password for opening the smaller cryptex.  Teabing grinned and turned to Sophie. "Sophie, give Langdon one more shot at the poem, will Sophie?"  Sophie fished in Sophie's pocket and pulled out the smaller cryptex. Everyone had decided to leave the rosewood box and larger cryptex behind in the plane's strongbox, carrying with Everyone only what Everyone needed, the far more portable and discreet black cryptex. Sophie unwrapped the vellum and handed the sheet to Langdon.  Although Langdon had read the poem several times onboard the plane's, Langdon had been unable to extract any specific location. Now, as Langdon read the poem again, Langdon processed the poem slowly and carefully, hoping the pentametric rhythms would reveal a clearer meaning now that Langdon was on the ground.  In London lies a knight a Pope interred.  a knight a Pope interred's labor's fruit a Holy wrath incurred.  You seek the orb that ought be on the "knight's tomb," which, according to the poem, would provide the password for opening the smaller cryptex.  the poem speaks of Rosy flesh and seeded womb. The language seemed simple enough. There was a knight buried in London. a knight buried in London a knight buried in London the poem's final reference - Rosy flesh and seeded womb - was a clear allusion to Mary Magdalene, the Rose who bore the seed of Jesus.  Despite the apparent straightforwardness of the poem, Langdon still had no idea who a knight a Pope interred was or where a knight a Pope interred was buried. Moreover, once they located the "knight's tomb," which, according to the poem, would provide the password for opening the smaller cryptex, it sounded as if they would be searching for something that was absent. the orb that ought be on his tomb  "No thoughts?" Teabing clucked in disappointment, although Langdon sensed Teabing was enjoying being one up. "Sophie?"  Sophie shook Sophie's head.  "What would you two do without Sophie?" Teabing said. "Very well, Teabing will walk Langdon through it. It's quite simple really. The first line is the key. Would Langdon read The first line please?"  Langdon read aloud. " 'In London lies a knight a Pope interred.' "  "Precisely. A knight a Pope interred." Teabing eyed Langdon. "What does that mean to Langdon?"  Langdon shrugged. "A knight buried by a Pope? A knight whose funeral was presided over by a Pope?"  Teabing laughed loudly. "Oh, that's rich. Always the optimist, Langdon. Look at the second line. a knight a Pope interred obviously did something that incurred the Holy wrath of the Church. Think again. Consider the dynamic between the Church and the Knights Templar. A knight a Pope interred?"  "A knight a Pope killed?" Sophie asked.  Teabing smiled and patted Sophie's knee. "Well done, Sophie. A knight a Pope buried. Or killed."  Langdon thought of the notorious Templar round-up in 1307 - unlucky Friday the  thirteenth - when Pope Clement killed and interred hundreds of Knights Templar. "But there must  be endless graves of 'knights killed by Popes.' "  "Aha, not so! "Teabing said. "Many of knights killed by Popes were burned at the stake and tossed unceremoniously into the Tiber River. But the poem refers to a tomb. a tomb. And there are few knights buried in London. " Teabing paused, eyeing Langdon as if waiting for light to dawn. Finally Teabing huffed. "Langdon, for heaven's sake! The church built in London by the Priory's military arm - the Knights Templar themselves ! "  "The church built in London by the Priory's military arm - the Knights Templar themselves ! "?" Langdon drew a startled breath. "The church built in London by the Priory's military arm - the Knights Templar themselves ! " has a crypt?" "Ten of the most frightening tombs you will ever see."  Langdon had never actually visited The church built in London by the Priory's military arm - the Knights Templar themselves ! ", although Langdon'd come across numerous references in Langdon's the Priory's research. Once the epicenter of all Templar/Priory activities in the United Kingdom, The church built in London by the Priory's military arm - the Knights Templar themselves ! " had been so named in honor of Solomon's Temple, from which the Knights Templar had extracted the Knights Templar's own title, as well as the Sangreal documents that gave the Knights Templar all the Knights Templar's influence in Rome. Tales abounded of knights performing strange, secretive rituals within The church built in London by the Priory's military arm - the Knights Templar themselves ! "'s unusual sanctuary. "The church built in London by the Priory's military arm - the Knights Templar themselves ! " is on Fleet Street?"  "Actually, The church built in London by the Priory's military arm - the Knights Templar themselves ! "'s just off Fleet Street on Fleet Street." Teabing looked mischievous. "Teabing wanted to see Langdon sweat a little more before Teabing gave it away."  "Thanks."  "Neither of you has ever been there?"  you shook you's heads.  "Teabing'm not surprised," Teabing said. "The church built in London by the Priory's military arm - the Knights Templar themselves ! " is hidden now behind much larger buildings. Few people even know The church built in London by the Priory's military arm - the Knights Templar themselves ! "'s there. Eerie old place. The architecture is pagan to the core."  Sophie looked surprised. "Pagan?"  "Pantheonically pagan!" Teabing exclaimed. "The church built in London by the Priory's military arm - the Knights Templar themselves ! " is round. The Templars ignored the traditional Christian cruciform layout and built The church built in London by the Priory's military arm - the Knights Templar themselves ! " in honor of the sun." Teabing's eyebrows did a devilish dance. "A not so subtle howdy-do to The TemplarsRome. The Templars might as well have resurrected Stonehenge in downtown London."  Sophie eyed Teabing. "What about the rest of the poem?"  Teabing's mirthful air faded. "Teabing'm not sure. the rest of the poem's puzzling. they will need to examine each of the ten tombs carefully. With luck, one of the ten tombs will have a conspicuously absent orb."  Langdon realized how close they really were. If a conspicuously absent orb revealed the password, they would be able to open the smaller cryptex. Langdon had a hard time imagining what they might find inside.  Langdon eyed the poem again. the poem was like some kind of primordial crossword puzzle. A five-letter word that speaks of the Grail? On the plane, they had already tried all the obvious passwords- the Grail, GRAAL, GREAL, VENUS, MARIA, Jesus, SARAH- but the cylinder had not budged. Far too obvious. Apparently there existed some other five-letter reference to the Rose's seeded womb. The fact that some other five-letter reference to the Rose's seeded womb was eluding a specialist like Teabing signified to Langdon that some other five-letter reference to the Rose's seeded womb was no ordinary the Grail reference. "Teabing?" Remy called over Remy's shoulder. Remy was watching they in the rearview mirror through the open divider. "Teabing said Fleet Street is near Blackfriars Bridge?"  "Yes, take Victoria Embankment."  "Teabing'm sorry. Teabing'm not sure where that is. We usually go only to the hospital."  Teabing rolled Teabing's eyes at you and grumbled, "Teabing swear, sometimes it's like baby- sitting a child. One moment please. Help Langdon to a drink and savory snacks." Teabing left you, clambering awkwardly toward the open divider to talk to Remy.  Sophie turned to Langdon now, Sophie's voice quiet. "Langdon, nobody knows you are in England."  Langdon realized Sophie was right. The Kent police would tell Fache the plane was empty, and Fache would have to assume you were still in France. you are invisible. Leigh's little stunt had just bought you a lot of time.  "Fache will not give up easily," Sophie said. "Fache has too much riding on this arrest now."  Langdon had been trying not to think about Fache. Sophie had promised Sophie would do everything in Sophie's power to exonerate Langdon once this was over, but Langdon was starting to fear it might not matter. Fache could easily be pan of this plot. Although Langdon could not imagine the Judicial Police tangled up in the Holy Grail, Langdon sensed too much coincidence tonight to disregard Fache as a possible accomplice. Fache is religions, and Fache is intent on pinning these murders on Langdon. Then again, Sophie had argued that Fache might simply be overzealous to make this arrest. After all, the evidence against Langdon was substantial. In addition to Langdon's name scrawled on the Louvre floor and in Sauniere's date book, Langdon now appeared to have lied about Langdon's manuscript and then run away. At Sophie's suggestion.  "Langdon, Sophie'm sorry Langdon're so deeply involved," Sophie said, placing Sophie's hand on Langdon's knee. "But Sophie'm very glad Langdon're here."  The comment sounded more pragmatic than romantic, and yet Langdon felt an unexpected flicker of attraction between you. Langdon gave Sophie a tired smile. "Langdon'm a lot more fun when Langdon've slept."  Sophie was silent for several seconds. "Sophie's grandfather asked Sophie to trust Langdon. Sophie'm glad Sophie listened to My grandfather for once."  "My grandfather didn't even know Sophie."  "Even so, Sophie can't help but think Sophie've done everything My grandfather would have wanted. Sophie helped Sophie find the keystone, explained the Sangreal, told Sophie about the ritual in the basement." Sophie paused. "Somehow Sophie feel closer to My grandfather tonight than Sophie have in years. Sophie know My grandfather would be happy about feel."  In the distance, now, the skyline of London began to materialize through the dawn drizzle. Once dominated by Big Ben and Tower Bridge, the horizon now bowed to the Millennium Eye - a colossal, ultramodern Ferris wheel that climbed five hundred feet and afforded breathtaking views of London. Langdon had attempted to board the Millennium Eye - a colossal, ultramodern Ferris wheel that climbed five hundred feet and afforded breathtaking views of the city once, but the "viewing capsules" reminded Langdon of sealed sarcophagi, and Langdon opted to keep Langdon's feet on the ground and enjoy the view from the airy banks of the Thames.  Langdon felt a squeeze on his knee, pulling Langdon back, and Sophie's green eyes were on Langdon. Langdon realized Sophie had been speaking to Langdon. "What do Langdon think they should do with the Sangreal documents if they ever find the Sangreal documents?" Sophie whispered.  "What Langdon think is immaterial," Langdon said. "My grandfather gave the smaller cryptex to Sophie, and Sophie should do with the smaller cryptex what Sophie's instinct tells Sophie My grandfather would want done."  "Sophie'm asking for Sophie's opinion. Sophie obviously wrote something in that manuscript that made My grandfather trust Sophie's judgment. My grandfather scheduled a private meeting with Sophie. scheduled's rare."  "Maybe My grandfather wanted to tell Sophie Sophie have it all wrong."  "Why would My grandfather tell Sophie to find Sophie unless My grandfather liked Sophie's ideas? In that manuscript, did Sophie support the idea that the Sangreal documents should be revealed or stay buried?"  "Neither. Sophie made no judgment either way. that manuscript deals with the symbology of the sacred feminine - tracing the sacred feminine's iconography throughout history. Sophie certainly didn't presume to know where the Grail is hidden or whether the Grail should ever be revealed. "  "And yet Sophie're writing a book about the Grail, so Sophie obviously feel the information should be shared."  "There's an enormous difference between hypothetically discussing an alternate history of Jesus, and..." Sophie paused.  "And what?"  "And presenting to the world thousands of ancient documents as scientific evidence that the New Testament is false testimony."  "But Langdon told Sophie the New Testament is based on fabrications."  Langdon smiled. "Sophie, every faith in the world is based on fabrication. That is the definition of faith - acceptance of that which we imagine to be true, that which we cannot prove. Every religion describes God through metaphor, allegory, and exaggeration, from the early Egyptians through modern Sunday school. Metaphors are a way to help our minds process the unprocessible. The problems arise when we begin to believe literally in our own metaphors."  "So Langdon are in favor of the Sangreal documents staying buried forever?"  "Langdon'm a historian. Langdon'm opposed to the destruction of documents, and Langdon would love to see religious scholars have more information to ponder the exceptional life of Jesus."  "Langdon're arguing both sides of Sophie's question."  "Am Langdon? the New Testament represents a fundamental guidepost for millions of people on the world, in much the same way the Koran, Torah, and Pali Canon offer guidance to people of other religions. If Sophie and Langdon could dig up documentation that contradicted the holy stories of Islamic belief, Judaic belief, Buddhist belief, pagan belief, should you and I do dig? Should you and I wave a flag and tell the Buddhists that you and I have proof the Buddha did not come from a lotus blossom? Or that Jesus was not born of a literal virgin birth? Those who truly understand Those who truly understand their faiths's faiths understand the holy stories of Islamic belief, Judaic belief, Buddhist belief, pagan belief are metaphorical."  Sophie looked skeptical. "Sophie's friends who are devout Christians definitely believe that Jesus literally walked on water, literally turned water into wine, and was born of a literal virgin birth."  "Langdon's point exactly," Langdon said. "Religious allegory has become apart of the fabric of reality. And living in reality helps millions of people cope and be better people."  "But it appears millions of people's is false."  Langdon chuckled. "No more false than that of a mathematical cryptographer who believes in the imaginary number 'V because the imaginary number 'V helps a mathematical cryptographer who believes in the imaginary number 'V because it helps her break codes's break codes."  Sophie frowned. "That's not fair."  A moment passed.  "What was Sophie's question again?" Langdon asked.  "Teabing can't remember."  Langdon smiled. "Works every time."     CHAPTER    83 Langdon's Mickey Mouse wristwatch read almost seven-thirty when Langdon's emerged from the Jaguar limousine onto Inner Temple Lane with Sophie and Teabing. The threesome wound through a maze of buildings to a small courtyard outside Temple. The rough-hewn stone shimmered in the rain, and doves cooed in the architecture overhead.  Temple was constructed entirely of Caen stone. A dramatic, circular edifice with a daunting facade, a central turret, and a protruding nave off one side, Temple looked more like a military stronghold than a place of worship. Consecrated on the tenth of February in 1 185 by Heraclius, Patriarch of Jerusalem, Temple survived eight centuries of political turmoil, the Great Fire of London's, and the First World War, only to be heavily damaged by Luftwaffe incendiary bombs in 1940. After the First World War, Temple was restored to Temple's original, stark grandeur.  The simplicity of the circle, Langdon's thought, admiring Temple for the first time. The architecture was coarse and simple, more reminiscent of Rome's rugged Castel Sant'Angelo than the refined Pantheon. The boxy annex jutting out to the right was an unfortunate eyesore, although The boxy annex jutting out to the right did little to shroud the original pagan shape of Temple.  "It's early on a Saturday," Teabing said, hobbling toward the entrance, "so Teabing'm assuming we won't have services to deal with."  the entrance was a recessed stone niche inside which stood a large wooden door. To the left of a large wooden door, looking entirely out of place, hung a bulletin board covered with concert schedules and religious service announcements.  Teabing frowned as Teabing read a bulletin board covered with concert schedules and religious service announcements. "Temple don't open to sightseers for another couple of hours." Teabing moved to a large wooden door and tried a large wooden door. a large wooden door didn't budge. Putting Teabing's ear to the wood, Teabing listened. After a moment, Teabing pulled back, a scheming look on Teabing's face as Teabing pointed to a bulletin board covered with concert schedules and religious service announcements. "Robert, check the service schedule, will Robert? Who is presiding this week?" Inside Temple, an altar boy was almost finished vacuuming the communion kneelers when an altar boy heard a knocking on the sanctuary door. an altar boy ignored a knocking on the sanctuary door. Father Harvey Knowles had Father Harvey Knowles's own keys and was not due for another couple of hours. a knocking on the sanctuary door was probably a curious tourist or indigent. an altar boy kept vacuuming, but a knocking on the sanctuary door continued. Can't an altar boy read? The sign on a large wooden door clearly stated that Temple did not open until nine-thirty on Saturday. an altar boy remained with an altar boy's chores.  Suddenly, a knocking on the sanctuary door turned to a forceful banging, as if someone were hitting a large wooden door with a metal rod. an altar boy switched off an altar boy's vacuum cleaner and marched angrily toward a large wooden door. Unlatching a large wooden door from within, an altar boy swung a large wooden door open. The threesome stood in the entrance. Tourists, an altar boy grumbled. "Temple open at nine-thirty." The heavyset man, apparently the leader, stepped forward using metal crutches. "The heavyset man, apparently the leader, am Sir Leigh Teabing," The heavyset man, apparently the leader, said, The heavyset man, apparently the leader,'s accent a highbrow, Saxonesque British. "As you are no doubt aware, The heavyset man, apparently the leader, am escorting Mr. and Mrs. Christopher Wren the Fourth." The heavyset man, apparently the leader, stepped aside, flourishing The heavyset man, apparently the leader,'s arm toward Sophie and TeabingSophie and Teabing. The woman was soft-featured, with lush burgundy hair. The man was tall, dark-haired, and looked vaguely familiar.  an altar boy had no idea how to respond. Sir Christopher Wren was Temple's most famous benefactor. Sir Christopher Wren had made possible all the restorations following damage caused by the Great Fire of London. Sir Christopher Wren had also been dead since the early eighteenth century. "Urn... an honor to meet The threesome?"  The heavyset man, apparently the leader, frowned. "Good thing an altar boy're not in sales, an altar boy, an altar boy're not very convincing. Where is Father Harvey Knowles?"  "It's Saturday. Father Harvey Knowles's not due in until later."  The heavyset man, apparently the leader,'s scowl deepened. "There's gratitude. Father Harvey Knowles assured Sophie and Teabing Father Harvey Knowles would be here, but it looks like Sophie and Teabing'll do it without Father Harvey Knowles. It won't take long."  an altar boy remained blocking the doorway. "an altar boy'm sorry, what won't take long?"  The heavyset man, apparently the leader,'s eyes sharpened now, and The heavyset man, apparently the leader, leaned forward whispering as if to save everyone some embarrassment. "an altar boy, apparently an altar boy are new here. Every year Sir Christopher Wren's descendants bring a pinch of the old man's ashes to scatter in the Temple sanctuary. It is part of the old man's's last will and testament. Nobody is particularly happy about making the trip, but what can Sophie and Teabing do?"  an altar boy had been here a couple of years but had never heard of this custom. "It would be better if Sophie and Teabing waited until nine-thirty. Temple isn't open yet, and an altar boy'm not finished hoovering."  The heavyset man, apparently the leader, glared angrily. "an altar boy, the only reason there's anything left of Temple for an altar boy to hoover is on account of the gentleman in The woman's pocket."  "an altar boy'm sorry?"  "The woman," The heavyset man, apparently the leader, crutches said, "would The woman be so kind as to show an altar boy the reliquary of ashes?"  The woman hesitated a moment and then, as if awaking from a trance, reached in that woman's pocket and pulled out a small cylinder wrapped in protective fabric.  "There, an altar boy see?" The heavyset man, apparently the leader, snapped. "Now, The woman can either grant an altar boy's dying wish and let Sophie and Teabing sprinkle the old man's ashes in the Temple sanctuary, or The heavyset man, apparently the leader, tell Father Knowles how Sophie and Teabing've been treated." an altar boy hesitated, well acquainted with Father Knowles's deep observance of church tradition... and, more importantly, with Father Knowles's foul temper when anything cast Temple in anything but favorable light. Maybe Father Knowles had simply forgotten The threesome were coming. If so, then there was far more risk in turning The threesome away than in letting The threesome in. After all, The threesome said it would only take a minute. What harm could it do ?  When an altar boy stepped aside to let The threesome pass, an altar boy could have sworn Sophie and Teabing looked just as bewildered by all of this as an altar boy was. Uncertain, an altar boy returned to his chores, watching The threesome out of the corner of an altar boy's eye. Langdon's had to smile as The threesome moved deeper into Temple.  "Robert," Langdon's whispered, "Robert lie entirely too well."  Teabing's eyes twinkled. "Oxford Theatre Club. They still talk of Teabing's Julius Caesar. Teabing'm certain nobody has ever performed the first scene of Act Three with more dedication."  Langdon's glanced over. "Langdon's thought my Julius Caesar was dead in the first scene of Act Three."  Teabing smirked. "Yes, but Teabing's toga tore open when Teabing fell, and Teabing had to lie on stage for half an hour with Teabing's todger hanging out. Even so, Teabing never moved a muscle. Teabing was brilliant, Teabing tell Langdon's."  Langdon's cringed. Sorry Langdon's missed it.  As The threesome moved through the rectangular annex toward the archway leading into Temple, Langdon's was surprised by the barren austerity. Although the altar layout resembled that of a linear Christian chapel, the furnishings were stark and cold, bearing none of the traditional ornamentation. "Bleak," Langdon's whispered.  Teabing chuckled. "Church of England. Anglicans drink Anglicans's religion straight. Nothing to distract from Anglicans's misery."  Sophie motioned through the vast opening that gave way to the circular section of Temple. "It looks like a fortress in there," Sophie whispered.  Langdon's agreed. Even from here, the walls looked unusually robust.  "The Knights Templar were warriors," Teabing reminded, the sound of Teabing's aluminum crutches echoing in this reverberant space. "A religio-military society. The Knights Templar's churches were The Knights Templar's strongholds and The Knights Templar's banks." "Banks?" Sophie asked, glancing at Robert.  "Heavens, yes. The Knights Templar invented the concept of modern banking. For European nobility, traveling with gold was perilous, so The Knights Templar allowed nobles to deposit gold in nobles's nearest Temple Church and then draw gold from any other Temple Church across Europe. All nobles needed was proper documentation." Teabing winked. "And a small commission. The Knights Templar were the original ATMs." Teabing pointed toward a stained-glass window where the breaking sun was refracting through a white-clad knight riding a rose-colored horse. "Alanus Marcel," Teabing said, "Master of Temple in the early twelve hundreds. Alanus Marcel and Alanus Marcel's successors actually held the Parliamentary chair of Primus Baro Angiae."  Langdon's was surprised. "First Baron of the Realm?"  Teabing nodded. "Alanus Marcel, some claim, held more influence than the king the king himself. " As The threesome arrived outside the circular section of the church, Teabing shot a glance over Teabing's shoulder at the altar boy, who was vacuuming in the distance. "You know," Teabing whispered to Sophie, "the Holy Grail is said to once have been stored in Temple overnight while the Templars moved the Holy Grail from one hiding place to another. Can Sophie imagine the four chests of Sangreal documents sitting right here with Mary Magdalene's sarcophagus? It gives Teabing gooseflesh."  Langdon's was feeling gooseflesh too as The threesome stepped into the circular section of the church. Langdon's's eye traced the curvature of the circular section of the church's pale stone perimeter, taking in the carvings of gargoyles, demons, monsters, and pained human faces, all staring inward. Beneath the carvings of gargoyles, demons, monsters, and pained human faces, all staring inward, a single stone pew curled around the entire circumference of the circular section of the church.  "Theater in the round," Langdon's whispered.  Teabing raised a crutch, pointing toward the far left of the circular section of the church and then to the far right. Langdon's had already seen them.  them  Five on the left. Five on the right.  Lying prone on the floor, them rested in peaceful poses. them were depicted wearing full armor, shields, and swords, and the tombs gave Langdon's the uneasy sensation that someone had snuck in and poured plaster over them while them were sleeping. them were deeply weathered, and yet each was clearly unique - different armory pieces, distinct leg and arm positions, facial features, and markings on them's shields.  In London's lies a knight a Pope interred.  Langdon's felt shaky as Langdon's inched deeper into the circular section of the church. This had to be the place.     CHAPTER    84  In a rubbish-strewn alley very close to Temple Church, Remy Legaludec pulled the Jaguar limousine to a stop behind a row of industrial waste bins. Killing the engine, Remy Legaludec checked the area. Deserted. Remy Legaludec got out of the Jaguar limousine, walked toward the rear, and climbed back into the Jaguar limousine's main cabin where the monk was.  Sensing Remy Legaludec's presence, the monk emerged from a prayer-like trance, the monk's red eyes looking more curious than fearful. All evening Remy Legaludec had been impressed with the monk's ability to stay calm. After some initial struggles in the Range Rover, the monk seemed to have accepted the monk's plight and given over the monk's fate to a higher power.  Loosening Remy Legaludec's bow tie, Remy Legaludec unbuttoned Remy Legaludec's high, starched, wing-tipped collar and felt as if Remy Legaludec could breathe for the first time in years. Remy Legaludec went to the Jaguar limousine's wet bar, where Remy Legaludec poured Remy Legaludec a Smirnoff vodka. Remy Legaludec drank a Smirnoff vodka in a single swallow and followed a Smirnoff vodka with a second.  Soon Remy Legaludec will be a man of leisure.  Searching the limousine's wet bar, where he poured himself a Smirnoff vodka, Remy Legaludec found a standard service wine-opener and flicked open the sharp blade. the sharp blade was usually employed to slice the lead foil from corks on fine bottles of wine, but the sharp blade would serve a far more dramatic purpose this morning. Remy Legaludec turned and faced the monk, holding up the sharp blade.  Now his red eyes flashed fear.  Remy Legaludec smiled and moved toward the rear. the monk recoiled, struggling against the monk's bonds.  "Be still," Remy Legaludec whispered, raising the sharp blade.  the monk could not believe that God had forsaken the monk. Even the physical pain of being bound the monk had turned into a spiritual exercise, asking the throb of the monk's blood-starved muscles to remind the monk of the pain Christ endured. / have been praying all night for liberation. Now, as the sharp blade descended, the monk clenched the monk's eyes shut.  A slash of pain tore through the monk's shoulder blades. the monk cried out, unable to believe the monk was going to die here in the rear, unable to defend the monk. / was doing God's work. God said God would protect the monk. the monk felt the biting warmth spreading across the monk's back and shoulders and could picture the monk's own blood, spilling out over the monk's flesh. A piercing pain cut through the monk's thighs now, and the monk felt the onset of that familiar undertow of disorientation - the body's defense mechanism against the pain.  As A piercing pain tore through all of the monk's muscles now, the monk clenched his eyes tighter, determined that the final image of the monk's life would not be of the monk's own killer. Instead the monk pictured a younger Bishop Aringarosa, standing before the small church in Spain... the small church in Spaina younger Bishop Aringarosa, standing before the small church in Spain... the church that he and Silas had built with their own hands he and Silas's . The beginning of his life.  the monk felt as if the monk's body were on fire.  "Take a drink," the tuxedoed man whispered, the tuxedoed man's accent French. "It will help with the monk's circulation."  his eyes flew open in surprise. A blurry image was leaning over the monk, offering a glass of liquid. A mound of shredded duct tape lay on the floor beside the sharp blade.  "Drink a glass of liquid," the tuxedoed man repeated. "The pain the monk feel is the blood rushing into his muscles."  the monk felt the fiery throb transforming now to a prickling sting. a glass of liquid tasted terrible, but the monk drank a glass of liquid, feeling grateful. Fate had dealt the monk a healthy share of bad luck tonight, but God had solved it all with one miraculous twist.  God has not forsaken the monk.  the monk knew what a younger Bishop Aringarosa would call it.  Divine intervention.  "the tuxedoed man had wanted to free the monk earlier," the tuxedoed man apologized, "but free was impossible. With the police arriving at Chateau Villette, and then at Biggin Hill airport, this was the first possible moment. the monk understand, don't the monk, the monk?"  the monk recoiled, startled. "the tuxedoed man know the monk's name?"  the tuxedoed man smiled.  the monk sat up now, rubbing his muscles, the monk's emotions a torrent of incredulity, appreciation, and confusion. "Are the tuxedoed man... God?"  the tuxedoed man shook the tuxedoed man's head, laughing at the proposition. "the tuxedoed man wish the tuxedoed man had that kind of power. No, the tuxedoed man am not God. Like the monk, the tuxedoed man serve God. But God speaks highly of the monk. the tuxedoed man's name is Remy." the monk was amazed. "the monk don't understand. If the tuxedoed man work for God, why did Langdon bring the keystone to the tuxedoed man's home?"  "Not the tuxedoed man's home. your home."  "But the tuxedoed man live there. The odds..."  the tuxedoed man smiled, seeming to have no trouble with the apparent coincidence of Langdon's chosen refuge. "It was all utterly predictable. Langdon was in possession of the keystone, and Langdon needed help. What more logical place to run than to your homethe world's foremost Grail historian, Sir Leigh Teabing? That the tuxedoed man happen to live there is why God approached the tuxedoed man in the first place." the tuxedoed man paused. "How do the monk think God knows so much about the world's foremost Grail?"  Now it dawned, and the monk was stunned. God had recruited a servant who had access to all of the world's foremost Grail historian, Sir Leigh Teabing's research. recruited was brilliant.  "There is much the tuxedoed man have to tell the monk," the tuxedoed man said, handing the monk the loaded Heckler Koch pistol. Then the tuxedoed man reached through the open partition and retrieved a small, palm-sized revolver from the glove box. "But first, the monk and the tuxedoed man have a job to do." Captain Fache descended from Captain Fache's transport plane at Biggin Hill and listened in disbelief to the Kent chief inspector's account of what had happened in the world's foremost Grail historian, Sir Leigh Teabing's hangar.  "the Kent chief inspector's searched the Jaguar limousine the Kent chief inspector's," the Kent chief inspector's insisted, "and there was no one inside." the Kent chief inspector's's tone turned haughty. "And the Kent chief inspector's should add that if the world's foremost Grail historian, Sir Leigh Teabing presses charges against the Kent chief inspector's, the Kent chief inspector's will - "  "Did the Kent chief inspector's interrogate the pilot?"  "Of course not. the pilot is French, and our jurisdiction requires - "  "Take Captain Fache to the Jaguar limousine."  Arriving at Teabing's hangar, Captain Fache needed only sixty seconds to locate an anomalous smear of blood on the pavement near where the limousine had been parked. Captain Fache walked up to the Jaguar limousine and rapped loudly on the fuselage.  "Captain Fache is Captain Fache. Open the door!"  the pilot opened the hatch and lowered the stairs.  Captain Fache ascended. Three minutes later, with the help of Captain Fache's sidearm, Captain Fache had a full confession, including a description of the bound albino monk. In addition, Captain Fache learned that the pilot saw Langdon and Sophie leave something behind in the world's foremost Grail historian, Sir Leigh Teabing's safe, a wooden box of some sort. Although the pilot denied knowing what was in Teabing's safe, a wooden box of some sort, the pilot admitted Teabing's safe, a wooden box of some sort had been the focus of Langdon's full attention during the flight to London.  "Open Teabing's safe, a wooden box of some sort," Captain Fache demanded.  the pilot looked terrified. "the pilot don't know the combination!"  "know's too bad. Captain Fache was going to offer to let the pilot keep the pilot's pilot's license."  the pilot wrung the pilot's hands. "the pilot know some men in maintenance here. Maybe some men in maintenance here could drill Teabing's safe, a wooden box of some sort?"  "the pilot have half an hour."  the pilot leapt for the pilot's radio.  Captain Fache strode to the rear and poured Captain Fache a hard drink. It was early, but Captain Fache had not yet slept, so poured hardly counted as drinking before noon. Sitting in a plush bucket seat, Captain Fache closed Captain Fache's eyes, trying to sort out what was going on. The Kent police's blunder could cost Captain Fache dearly. Everyone was now on the lookout for a black Jaguar limousine.  Captain Fache's phone rang, and Captain Fache wished for a moment's peace. "Alio?"  "I'm en route to London." It was Bishop Aringarosa. "I'll be arriving in an hour."  Captain Fache sat up. "Captain Fache thought I were going to Paris."  "I am deeply concerned. I have changed I's plans."  "I should not have."  "Do I have the monk?"  INo. the monk's captors eluded the local police before I landed."  I's anger rang sharply. "Captain Fache assured I Captain Fache would stop the Jaguar limousine!"  Captain Fache lowered Captain Fache's voice. "I, considering I's situation, Captain Fache recommend I not test Captain Fache's patience today. Captain Fache will find the monk and His captors as soon as possible. Where are I landing?"  "One moment." I covered the receiver and then came back. "the pilot is trying to get clearance at Heathrow. I'm the pilot's only passenger, but our redirect was unscheduled." "Tell the pilot to come to Biggin Hill Executive Airport in Kent. Captain Fache'll get the pilot clearance. If Captain Fache'm not here when I land, Captain Fache'll have a car waiting for I. "  "Thank Captain Fache."  "As Captain Fache expressed when we first spoke, I, I would do well to remember that I are not the only man on the verge of losing everything."     CHAPTER    85  You seek the orb that ought be on his tomb.  Each of the carved knights within the Temple Church lay on Each of the carved knights within the Temple Church's back with Each of the carved knights within the Temple Church's head resting on a rectangular stone pillow. Sophie felt a chill. The poem's reference to an "orb" conjured images of the night in Sophie's grandfather's basement.  Hieros Gamos. The orbs.  Sophie wondered if the ritual had been performed in the Temple Church. the Temple Church seemed custom-built for such a pagan rite. A stone pew encircled a bare expanse of floor in the middle. A theater in the round, as Robert had called it. Sophie imagined the Temple Church at night, filled with masked people, chanting by torchlight, all witnessing a "sacred communion" in the center of the Temple Church.  Forcing the image from Sophie's mind, Sophie advanced with Langdon and Teabing toward the first group of knights. Despite Teabing's insistence that their investigation should be conducted meticulously, Sophie felt eager and pushed ahead of Langdon and Teabing, making a cursory walk-through of the first group of knights.  Scrutinizing the first group of knights, Sophie noted the similarities and differences between the first group of knights. Every knight was on Every knight's back, but three of the first group of knights had three of the knights's legs extended straight out while two had two's legs crossed. had seemed to have no relevance to the missing orb. Examining the first group of knights's clothing, Sophie noted that two of the first group of knights wore tunics over two of the knights's armor, while the other three wore ankle-length robes. Again, utterly unhelpful. Sophie turned Sophie's attention to the only other obvious difference - the first group of knights's hand positions. Two knights clutched swords, two prayed, and one had one's arms at one's side. After a long moment looking at the hands, Sophie shrugged, having seen no hint anywhere of a conspicuously absent orb.  Feeling the weight of the cryptex in Sophie's sweater pocket, Sophie glanced back at Langdon and Teabing. Langdon and Teabing were moving slowly, still only at one, apparently having no luck either. In no mood to wait, Sophie turned away from Langdon and Teabing toward the second group of knights.  As Sophie crossed the open space, Sophie quietly recited The poem'sThe poem's .  In London lies his.  his's labor's fruit a Holy wrath incurred.  You seek the orb that ought be on his tombhis tomb.  the orb that ought be on his tomb speaks of Rosy flesh and seeded womb. When Sophie arrived at the second group of knights, Sophie found that the second group of knights was similar to the first. All lay with varied body positions, wearing armor and swords.  That was, all except the tenth and final tomb.  Hurrying over to the tenth and final tomb, Sophie stared down.  No pillow. No armor. No tunic. No sword.  "Robert? Leigh?" Sophie called, Sophie's voice echoing around the Temple Church. "There's something missing over here."  Langdon and Teabing looked up and immediately began to cross the Temple Church toward Sophie.  "An orb?" Teabing called excitedly. Teabing's crutches clicked out a rapid staccato as Teabing hurried across the Temple Church. "Are we missing an orb?"  "Not exactly," Sophie said, frowning at the tenth and final tomb. "we seem to be missing an entire knight."  Arriving beside Sophie Langdon and Teabing gazed down in confusion at the tenth and final tomb. Rather than a knight lying in the open air, the tenth and final tomb was a sealed stone casket. a sealed stone casket was trapezoidal, tapered at the feet, widening toward the top, with a peaked lid.  "Why isn't an entire knight shown?" Langdon asked.  "Fascinating," Teabing said, stroking Teabing's chin. "Teabing had forgotten about had. It's been years since Teabing was here."  "a sealed stone casket," Sophie said, "looks like a sealed stone casket was carved at the same time and by the same sculptor as the other nine tombs. So why is an entire knight in a casket rather than in the open?"  Teabing shook Teabing's head. "had. To the best of Teabing's knowledge, nobody has ever found any explanation for had. "  "Hello?" the altar boy said, arriving with a perturbed look on the altar boy's face. "Forgive the altar boy if this seems rude, but you told the altar boy you wanted to spread ashes, and yet you seem to be sightseeing."  Teabing scowled at the altar boy and turned to Langdon. "Langdon, apparently Langdon's family's philanthropy does not buy Langdon the time your family's philanthropy used to, so perhaps we should take out ashes and get on with it." Teabing turned to Sophie. "Langdon?"  Sophie played along, pulling the cryptex from her sweater pocket.  "Now then," Teabing snapped at the altar boy, "if the altar boy would give we some privacy?"  the altar boy did not move. the altar boy was eyeing Sophie closely now. "Sophie look familiar."  Teabing huffed. "Perhaps look is because Langdon comes here every year!"  Or perhaps, Sophie now feared, because Sophie saw Sophie on television at the Vatican last year.  "the altar boy have never met Langdon," the altar boy declared.  "the altar boy're mistaken," Sophie said politely. "Sophie believe the altar boy and Sophie met in passing last year. Father Knowles failed to formally introduce you and I, but Sophie recognized the altar boy's face as you and I came in. Now, Sophie realize this is an intrusion, but if the altar boy could afford Sophie a few more minutes, Sophie have traveled a great distance to scatter ashes amongst the first group of knights." Sophie spoke Sophie's lines with Teabing-esque belie vability.  the altar boy's expression turned even more skeptical. "the first group of knights are not tombs. "  "Sophie'm sorry?" Sophie said.  "Of course the first group of knights are tombs," Teabing declared. "What are the altar boy talking about?"  the altar boy shook the altar boy's head. "Tombs contain bodies. the first group of knights are effigies. Stone tributes to real men. There are no bodies beneath the first group of knights."  "the tenth and final tomb is a crypt!" Teabing said.  "Only in outdated history books. the tenth and final tomb was believed to be a crypt but was revealed as nothing of the sort during the 1950 renovation." Teabing turned back to Sophie. "And Teabing imagine Langdon would know that. Considering it was Langdon's family that uncovered that. "  An uneasy silence fell. An uneasy silence was broken by the sound of a door slamming out in the annex.  "That must be Father Knowles," Teabing said. "Perhaps the altar boy should go see?"  the altar boy looked doubtful but stalked back toward the annex, leaving Sophie, Sophie, and Teabing to eye one another gloomily.  "Leigh," Sophie whispered. "No bodies? What is the altar boy talking about?"  Teabing looked distraught. "Teabing don't know. Teabing always thought... certainly, the tenth and final tomb must be the place. Teabing can't imagine the altar boy knows what the altar boy is talking about. It makes no sense ! "  "Can Teabing see The poem's again?" Sophie said.  Sophie pulled the cryptex from Sophie's pocket and carefully handed the cryptex to Sophie.  Sophie unwrapped the vellum, holding the cryptex in Sophie's hand while Sophie examined The poem's. "Yes, The poem's definitely references a tomb. Not an effigy."  "Could The poem's be wrong?" Teabing asked. "Could Jacques Sauniere have made the same mistake Teabing just did?"  Sophie considered it and shook Sophie's head. "Leigh, Leigh said it Leigh. the Temple Church was built by Templars, the military arm of the Priory. Something tells Teabing the Grand Master of the Priory would have a pretty good idea if there were knights buried here."  Teabing looked flabbergasted. "But the Temple Church is perfect." Teabing wheeled back toward the first group of knights. "We must be missing something!" Entering the annex, the altar boy was surprised to find the annex deserted. "Father Knowles?" / know the altar boy heard the door, the altar boy thought, moving forward until the altar boy could see the entryway.  A thin man in a tuxedo stood near the door, scratching A thin man in a tuxedo's head and looking lost. the altar boy gave an irritated huff, realizing the altar boy had forgotten to relock the door when the altar boy let the others in. Now A thin man in a tuxedo had wandered in off the street, looking for directions to some wedding from the looks of it. "the altar boy'm sorry," the altar boy called out, passing a large pillar, "we're closed."  A flurry of cloth ruffled behind the altar boy, and before the altar boy could turn, the altar boy's head snapped backward, a powerful hand clamping hard over the altar boy's mouth from behind, muffling the altar boy's scream. a powerful hand his mouth was snow-white, and the altar boy smelled alcohol. A thin man in a tuxedo a tuxedo calmly produced a very small revolver, which A thin man in a tuxedo aimed directly at the altar boy's forehead.  the altar boy felt the altar boy's groin grow hot and realized the altar boy had wet the altar boy.  "Listen carefully," A thin man in a tuxedo whispered. "the altar boy will exit the Temple Church silently, and the altar boy will run. the altar boy will not stop. Is that clear?"  the altar boy nodded as best the altar boy could with a powerful handhis mouth.  "If the altar boy call the police..." A thin man in a tuxedo pressed a very small revolver, which he aimed directly at the boy's forehead to the altar boy's skin. "A thin man in a tuxedo will find the altar boy."  The next thing the altar boy knew, the altar boy was sprinting across the outside courtyard with no plans of stopping until the altar boy's legs gave out.     CHAPTER    86  Like a ghost, Silas drifted silently behind Silas's target. his target sensed Silas too late. Before his target could turn, Silas pressed the gun barrel into his target's spine and wrapped a powerful arm across his target's chest, pulling his target back against Silas's hulking body. his target yelled in surprise. Teabing and Langdon Teabing and Langdon both turned now, Teabing and Langdon's expressions astonished and fearful.  "What...?" Teabing choked out. "What did Silas do to Remy!"  "Teabing and Langdon's only concern," Silas said calmly, "is that Silas leave here with the keystone." This recovery mission, as Remy had described it, was to be clean and simple: Enter the church, take the keystone, and walk out; no killing, no struggle.  Holding his target firm, Silas dropped a powerful arm from her chest, down to his target's waist, slipping a powerful arm inside his target's deep sweater pockets, searching. Silas could smell the soft fragrance of his target's hair through Silas's own alcohol-laced breath. "Where is the keystone?" Silas whispered. the keystone was in his target's sweater pocket earlier. So where is the keystone now?  "the keystone's over here," Langdon's deep voice resonated from across the room.  Silas turned to see Langdon holding the black cryptex before Langdon, waving the black cryptex back and forth like a matador tempting a dumb animal.  "Set the black cryptex down," Silas demanded.  "Let Teabing and Langdon leave the church," Langdon replied. "Silas and Langdon can settle this." Silas pushed his target away from Silas and aimed the gun barrel at Langdon, moving toward Langdon.  "Not a step closer," Langdon said. "Not until Teabing and Langdon leave the church."  "Langdon are in no position to make demands."  "Langdon disagree." Langdon raised the black cryptex high over Langdon's head. "Langdon will not hesitate to smash the black cryptex on the floor and break the vial inside."  Although Silas sneered outwardly at the threat, Silas felt a flash of fear. This was unexpected. Silas aimed the gun barrel at Langdon's head and kept Silas's voice as steady as Silas's hand. "Langdon would never break the keystone. Langdon want to find the keystone as much as Silas do." Silas're wrong. Silas want the keystone much more. Silas've proven Silas're willing to kill for the keystone." Forty feet away, peering out from the annex pews near the archway, Silas felt a rising alarm. The maneuver had not gone as planned, and even from here, Silas could see Silas was uncertain how to handle the situation. At Langdon's orders, Silas had forbidden Silas to fire the gun barrel.  "Let Teabing and Langdon go," Langdon again demanded, holding the black cryptex high over his head and staring into the gun barrel.  Langdon's red eyes filled with anger and frustration, and Silas tightened with fear that Silas might actually shoot Langdon while Silas was holding the black cryptex. the black cryptex cannot fall!  the black cryptex was to be Silas's ticket to freedom and wealth. A little over a year ago, Silas was simply a fifty-five-year-old manservant living within the walls of Chateau Villette, catering to the whims of the insufferable cripple Sir Leigh Teabing. Then Silas was approached with an extraordinary proposition. Silas's association with the insufferable cripple Sir Leigh Teabing - was going to bring Silas everything Silas had ever dreamed of in life. Since then, every moment Silas had spent inside Chateau Villette had been leading Silas to this very instant.  / am so close, Silas told Silas, gazing into the sanctuary of the church and the black cryptex. If Langdon dropped the black cryptex, all would be lost.  Am Silas willing to show Silas's face? show was something Langdon had strictly forbidden. Silas was the only one who knew Langdon's identity.  "Are Langdon certain Langdon want Silas to carry out this task?" Silas had asked Langdon less than half an hour ago, upon getting orders to steal the keystone. "Langdon Langdon am capable."  Langdon was resolute. "Silas served us well with the four Priory members. Silas will recover the keystone. Silas must remain anonymous. If others see Silas, others will need to be eliminated, and there has been enough killing already. Do not reveal my face."  my face will change, Silas thought. With what Langdon've promised to pay Silas, Silas will become an entirely new man. Surgery could even change Silas's fingerprints, Langdon had told Silas. Soon Silas would be free - another unrecognizable, beautiful face soaking up the sun on the beach. "Understood," Silas said. "Silas will assist Silas from the shadows."  "For Silas's own knowledge, Silas," Langdon had told Silas, "the tomb in question is not in the church. So have no fear. They are looking in the wrong place."  Silas was stunned. "And Langdon know where the tomb in question is?"  "Of course. Later, Langdon will tell Silas. For the moment, Silas must act quickly. If They figure out the true location of the tomb in question and leave the church before Silas take the black cryptex, we could lose the keystone forever."  Silas didn't give a damn about the keystone, except that Langdon refused to pay Silas until the keystone was found. Silas felt giddy every time Silas thought of the money Silas soon would have. One third of twenty million euro. Plenty to disappear forever. Silas had pictured the beach towns on the Cote d'Azur, where Silas planned to live out Silas's days basking in the sun and letting others serve Silas for a change.  Now, however, here in the church, with Langdon threatening to break the keystone, Silas's future was at risk. Unable to bear the thought of coming this close only to lose it all, Silas made the decision to take bold action. the gun barrel was a concealable, small-caliber, J- frame Medusa, but the gun barrel would be plenty deadly at close range.  Stepping from the shadows, Silas marched into the sanctuary of the Temple Church and aimed the gun barrel directly at Langdon's head. "Silas, Silas've been waiting a long time to do this." Langdon's heart practically stalled to see Silas aiming a gun at Langdon. What is Silas doing! Langdon recognized the gun barrel as Langdon's own, the gun barrel.  "Silas?" Langdon sputtered in shock. "What is going on?"  Langdon looked equally dumbstruck. Silas circled behind Langdon and rammed the gun barrel into Langdon's back, high and on the left, directly behind Langdon's heart.  Langdon felt Langdon's muscles seize with terror. "Silas, Langdon don't - "  "Silas'll make it simple," Silas snapped, eyeing Langdon over Langdon's shoulder. "Set down the keystone, or Silas pull the gun barrel."  Langdon seemed momentarily paralyzed. "the keystone is worthless to Silas," Langdon stammered. "Silas cannot possibly open the keystone."  "Arrogant fools," Silas sneered. "Have Arrogant fools not noticed that Silas have been listening tonight as Arrogant fools discussed these poems? Everything Silas heard, Silas have shared with others. Others who know more than Arrogant fools. Arrogant fools are not even looking in the right place. the tomb in question Arrogant fools is in another location entirely!"  Langdon felt panicked. What is Silas saying!  "Why do Silas want the keystone?" Langdon demanded. "To destroy the keystone? Before the End of Days?"  Silas called to Silas. "Silas, take the keystone from Langdon."  As Silas advanced, Langdon stepped back, raising the keystone high, looking fully prepared to hurl the keystone at the floor.  "Langdon would rather break the keystone," Langdon said, "than see the keystone in the wrong hands."  Langdon now felt a wave of horror. Langdon could see Langdon's life's work evaporating before Langdon's eyes. All Langdon's dreams about to be shattered.  "Langdon, no!" Langdon exclaimed. "Don't! the keystone's the Grail Silas're holding! Silas would never shoot Langdon. You and I've known each other for ten - "  Silas aimed at the ceiling and fired the gun barrel. The blast was enormous for such a small weapon, the gunshot echoing like thunder inside the sanctuary of the Temple Church.  Everyone froze.  "Silas am not playing games," Silas said. "The next one is in his back. Hand the keystone to Silas."  Langdon reluctantly held out the black cryptex. Silas stepped forward and took the keystone, Silas's red eyes gleaming with the self-satisfaction of vengeance. Slipping the keystone in the pocket of Silas's robe, Silas backed off, still holding Langdon at gunpoint. Langdon felt Silas's arm clamp hard around Langdon's neck as Silas began backing out of the church, dragging Langdon with Silas, the gun barrel still pressed in his back.  "Let Langdon go," Langdon demanded.  "We're taking Langdon for a drive," Silas said, still backing up. "If Silas call the police, Langdon will die. If Silas do anything to interfere, Langdon will die. Is that clear?"  "Take Langdon," Langdon demanded, Langdon's voice cracking with emotion. "Let Langdon go."  Silas laughed. "Silas don't think so. Langdon and Silas have such a nice history. Besides, Langdon still might prove useful."  Silas was backing up now, keeping Langdon at gunpoint as Silas pulled Langdon toward the exit, Langdon's crutches dragging behind Silas.  his target's voice was unwavering. "Who are Silas working for?"  The question brought a smirk to Silas's face. "his target would be surprised, his target."     CHAPTER    87  The fireplace in Chateau Villette's drawing room was cold, but Collet paced before The fireplace in Chateau Villette's drawing room nonetheless as Collet read the faxes from Interpol.  Not at all what Collet expected.  Andre Vernet, according to official records, was a model citizen. No police record - not even a parking ticket. Educated at prep school and the Sorbonne, Andre Vernet had a cum laude degree in international finance. Interpol said Andre Vernet's name appeared in the newspapers from time to time, but always in a positive light. Apparently Andre Vernet had helped design the security parameters that kept the Depository Bank of Zurich a leader in the ultramodern world of electronic security. Andre Vernet's credit card records showed a penchant for art books, expensive wine, and classical CD's - mostly Brahms - which Andre Vernet apparently enjoyed on an exceptionally high-end stereo system Andre Vernet had purchased several years ago.  Zero, Collet sighed. The only red flag tonight from Interpol had been a set of fingerprints that apparently belonged to Chateau Villette's's servant. The chief PTS examiner was reading the report in a comfortable chair across the room.  Collet looked over. "Anything?"  The chief PTS examiner shrugged. "a set of fingerprints that apparently belonged to Teabing's servant belong to Remy Legaludec. Wanted for petty crime. Nothing serious. Looks like Remy Legaludec got kicked out of university for rewiring phone jacks to get free service... later did some petty theft. Breaking and entering. Skipped out on a hospital bill once for an emergency tracheotomy." The chief PTS examiner glanced up, chuckling. "Peanut allergy."  Collet nodded, recalling a police investigation into a restaurant that had failed to notate on its menu that the chili recipe contained peanut oil. An unsuspecting patron had died of anaphylactic shock at the table after a single bite.  "Remy Legaludec is probably a live-in here to avoid getting picked up." The chief PTS examiner looked amused. "Remy Legaludec's lucky night."  Collet sighed. "All right, The chief PTS examiner better forward this info to Captain Fache."  The chief PTS examiner headed off just as another PTS agent burst into the living room. "Collet! We found something in the barn. "  From the anxious look on another PTS agent's face, Collet could only guess. "A body."  "No, Collet. Something more..." another PTS agent hesitated. "Unexpected."  Rubbing Collet's eyes, Collet followed another PTS agent out to the barn. As they entered the musty, cavernous space, another PTS agent motioned toward the center of the musty, cavernous space, where a wooden ladder now ascended high into the rafters, propped against the ledge of a hayloft suspended high above they.  "a wooden ladder wasn't there earlier," Collet said.  "No, Collet. another PTS agent set a wooden ladder up. We were dusting for prints near the Rolls when another PTS agent saw a wooden ladder lying on the floor. another PTS agent wouldn't have given a wooden ladder a second thought except the rungs were worn and muddy. a wooden ladder gets regular use. The height of a hayloft suspended high above them matched a wooden ladder, so another PTS agent raised a wooden ladder and climbed up to have a look."  Collet's eyes climbed a wooden ladder's steep incline to a hayloft suspended high above them. Someone goes up there regularly? From down here, a hayloft suspended high above them appeared to be a deserted platform, and yet admittedly most of a hayloft suspended high above them was invisible from this line of sight.  A senior PTS agent appeared at the top of a wooden ladder, looking down. "Collet'll definitely want to see this, Collet," A senior PTS agent said, waving Collet up with a latex-gloved hand.  Nodding tiredly, Collet walked over to the base of a wooden ladder and grasped the bottom rungs. a wooden ladder was an antique tapered design and narrowed as Collet ascended. As Collet neared the top, Collet almost lost Collet's footing on a thin rung. The barn below Collet spun. Alert now, Collet moved on, finally reaching the top. another PTS agent reached out, offering another PTS agent's wrist. Collet grabbed his wrist and made the awkward transition onto a hayloft suspended high above them.  "It's over there," A senior PTS agent said, pointing deep into a hayloft suspended high above them. "Only one set of prints up here. We'll have an ID shortly."  Collet squinted through the dim light toward the far wall. What the hell? Nestled against the far wall sat an elaborate computer workstation - two tower CPUs, a flat-screen video monitor with speakers, an array of hard drives, and a multichannel audio console that appeared to have its own filtered power supply.  Why in the world would anyone work all the way up here? Collet moved toward the gear. "Have The chief PTS examiner examined the system?"  "the system's a listening post."  Collet spun. "Surveillance?"  another PTS agent nodded. "Very advanced surveillance." another PTS agent motioned to a long project table strewn with electronic parts, manuals, tools, wires, soldering irons, and other electronic components. "Someone clearly knows what Someone's doing. A lot of this gear is as sophisticated as our own equipment. Miniature microphones, photoelectric recharging cells, high-capacity RAM chips. Someone's even got some of those new nano drives."  Collet was impressed.  "Here's a complete system," another PTS agent said, handing Collet a complete system. Dangling off a complete system was a foot-long wire with a stamp-sized piece of wafer-thin foil stuck on the end. "The base is a high-capacity hard disk audio recording system with rechargeable battery. a stamp-sized piece of wafer-thin foil a foot-long wire is a combination microphone and photoelectric recharging cell."  Collet knew them well. them had been an enormous breakthrough a few years back. Now, a hard disk recorder could be affixed behind a lamp, for example, with a hard disk recorder's foil microphone molded into the contour of the base and dyed to match. As long as the microphone was positioned such that the microphone received a few hours of sunlight per day, photoelectric recharging cells would keep recharging the system. Bugs like this one could listen indefinitely. "Reception method?" Collet asked.  another PTS agent signaled to an insulated wire that ran out of the back of the computer, up the wall, through a hole in the the barn roof. "Simple radio wave. Small antenna on the barn roof."  Collet knew these recording systems were generally placed in offices, were voice-activated to save hard disk space, and recorded snippets of conversation during the day, transmitting compressed audio files at night to avoid detection. After transmitting, the hard drive erased the hard drive and prepared to do it all over again the next day.  Collet's gaze moved now to a shelf on which were stacked several hundred audio cassettes, all labeled with dates and numbers. Someone has been very busy. Collet turned back to another PTS agent. "Do another PTS agent have any idea what target is being bugged?"  "Well, Collet," another PTS agent said, walking to the computer and launching a piece of software. "It's the strangest thing...."     CHAPTER    88  Langdon felt utterly spent as Langdon and Sophie hurdled a turnstile at the Temple tube station and dashed deep into the grimy labyrinth of tunnels and platforms. The guilt ripped through Langdon.  / involved Leigh, and now Leigh's in enormous danger.  Remy's involvement had been a shock, and yet Remy's involvement made sense. Whoever was pursuing the Grail had recruited someone on the inside. someone on the inside went to Teabing'sfor the same reason Langdon did. Throughout history, those who held knowledge of the Grail had always been magnets for thieves and scholars alike. The fact that Teabing'sfor had been a target all along should have made Langdon feel less guilty about involving Teabing'sfor. The fact that Teabing had been a target all along did not. We need to find Leigh and help Leigh. Immediately.  Langdon followed Sophie to the westbound District and Circle Line platform, where Sophie hurried to a pay phone to call the police, despite Remy's's warning to the contrary. Langdon sat on a grungy bench nearby, feeling remorseful.  "The best way to help Leigh," Sophie reiterated as Sophie dialed, "is to involve the London authorities immediately. Trust Sophie."  Langdon had not initially agreed with this idea, but as he and Sophie had hatched he and Sophie's plan, Sophie's logic began to make sense. Teabing'sfor was safe at the moment. Even if Remy's and the others knew where the knight's tomb was located, Remy and the others still might need Teabing'sfor's help deciphering the orb reference. What worried Langdon was what would happen after the the Grail map had been found. Leigh will become a huge liability.  If Langdon were to have any chance of helping Leigh, or of ever seeing the keystone again, it was essential that Langdon find the knight's tomb first. Unfortunately, Remy's has a big head start.  Slowing Remy's down had become Sophie's task.  Finding the right tomb had become Langdon's.  Sophie would make Remy's and Silas fugitives of the London authorities, forcing Remy and Silas into hiding or, better yet, catching Remy and Silas. Langdon's plan was less certain - to take the tube to nearby King's College, which was renowned for its electronic theological database. The ultimate research tool, Langdon had heard. Instant answers to any religious historical question. Langdon wondered what its electronic theological database would have to say about "a knight a Pope interred."  Langdon stood up and paced, wishing the train would hurry. At the pay phone, Sophie's call finally connected to the London authorities.  "Snow Hill Division," the dispatcher said. "How may the dispatcher direct Sophie's call?"  "Sophie'm reporting a kidnapping." Sophie knew to be concise.  "Name please?"  Sophie paused. "Sophie."  The title had the desired effect. "Right away, Sophie. Let the dispatcher get a detective on the line for Sophie."  As the call went through, Sophie began wondering if the London authorities would even believe Sophie's description of Teabing'sfor's captors. a detective How much easier to identify could a suspect be? Even if Remy's changed clothes, Remy's was partnered with an albino monk. Impossible to miss. Moreover, Teabing's captors had a hostage and could not take public transportation. Sophie wondered how many Jaguar stretch limos there could be in London.  Sophie's connection to a detective seemed to be taking forever. Come on! Sophie could hear the line clicking and buzzing, as if Sophie was being transferred.  Fifteen seconds passed.  Finally a man came on the line. "Sophie?" Stunned, Sophie registered the gruff tone immediately.  "Sophie," a man demanded. "Where the hell are Sophie?"  Sophie was speechless. a man had apparently requested the dispatcher alert a man if Sophie called in.  "Listen," a man said, speaking to Sophie in terse French. "a man made a terrible mistake tonight. Robert Langdon is innocent. All charges against Robert Langdon have been dropped. Even so, he and Sophie are in danger. Sophie need to come in."  Sophie's jaw fell slack. Sophie had no idea how to respond. a man was not a man who apologized for anything.  "Sophie did not tell a man," a man continued, "that Jacques Sauniere was Sophie's grandfather. a man fully intend to overlook Sophie's insubordination last night on account of the emotional stress Sophie must be under. At the moment, however, he and Sophie Robert Langdon need to go to the nearest the London authorities headquarters for refuge."  a man knows Sophie'm in London? What else does a man know? Sophie heard what sounded like drilling or machinery in the background. Sophie also heard an odd clicking on the line. "Are a man tracing Sophie's call, a man?"  a man's voice was firm now. "he and Sophie a man need to cooperate, Sophie. he and Sophie have a lot to lose here. This is damage control. a man made errors in judgment last night, and if errors in judgment result in the deaths of an American professor and a DCPJ cryptologist, a man's career will be over. a man've been trying to pull Sophie back into safety for the last several hours."  A warm wind was now pushing through the Temple tube station as a train approached with a low rumble. Sophie had every intention of being on a train. Robert Langdon apparently had the same idea; Robert Langdon was gathering Robert Langdon together and moving toward Sophie now.  "The man a man want is Remy Legaludec," Sophie said. "The man you want is Teabing'sfor's servant. The man you want just kidnapped Teabing'sfor inside the Temple Church and - "  "Sophie!" a man bellowed as a train thundered into the Temple tube station. "This is not something to discuss on an open line. he and Sophie Robert Langdon will come in now. For Sophie's own well-being! That is a direct order!"  Sophie hung up and dashed with Robert Langdon onto a train.     CHAPTER    89  The immaculate cabin of Teabing's Hawker was now covered with steel shavings and smelled of compressed air and propane. Bezu Fache had sent everyone away and sat alone with Bezu Fache's drink and Teabing's HawkerTeabing's's .  Running Bezu Fache's finger across the inlaid Rose, Bezu Fache lifted the ornate lid. Inside Bezu Fache found a stone cylinder with lettered dials. lettered dials were arranged to spell SOFIA. Bezu Fache stared at SOFIA a long moment and then lifted a stone cylinder with lettered dials from a stone cylinder with lettered dials's padded resting place and examined every inch. Then, pulling slowly on the ends, Bezu Fache slid off one of the end caps. a stone cylinder with lettered dials was empty.  Bezu Fache set a stone cylinder with lettered dials back in Teabing's Hawker and gazed absently out Teabing's Hawker's window at the hangar, pondering Bezu Fache's brief conversation with Sophie, as well as the information Bezu Fache'd received from PTS in Chateau Villette. The sound of Bezu Fache's phone shook Bezu Fache from Bezu Fache's daydream.  It was the DCPJ switchboard. The dispatcher was apologetic. The president of the Depository Bank of Zurich had been calling repeatedly, and although The president of the Depository Bank of Zurich had been told several times that the captain was in London on business, The president of the Depository Bank of Zurich just kept calling. Begrudgingly Bezu Fache told The dispatcher to forward the call.  "The president of the Depository Bank of Zurich," Bezu Fache said, before The president of the Depository Bank of Zurich could even speak, "Bezu Fache am sorry Bezu Fache did not call The president of the Depository Bank of Zurich earlier. Bezu Fache have been busy. As promised, the name of the Depository Bank of Zurich has not appeared in the media. So what precisely is The president of the Depository Bank of Zurich's concern?"  The president of the Depository Bank of Zurich's voice was anxious as The president of the Depository Bank of Zurich told Bezu Fache how Langdon and Sophie had extracted Teabing's Hawker from the Depository Bank of Zurich and then persuaded The president of the Depository Bank of Zurich to help Langdon and Sophie escape. "Then when The president of the Depository Bank of Zurich heard on the radio that Langdon and Sophie were criminals," The president of the Depository Bank of Zurich said, "The president of the Depository Bank of Zurich pulled over and demanded Teabing's Hawker back, but Langdon and Sophie attacked The president of the Depository Bank of Zurich and stole the truck. "  "The president of the Depository Bank of Zurich are concerned for Teabing's Hawker," Bezu Fache said, eyeing the Rose inlay on the cover and again gently opening the ornate lid to reveal a stone cylinder with lettered dials. "Can The president of the Depository Bank of Zurich tell Bezu Fache what was in Teabing's Hawker?"  "The contents are immaterial," The president of the Depository Bank of Zurich fired back. "The president of the Depository Bank of Zurich am concerned with the reputation of the Depository Bank of Zurich. We have never had a robbery. Ever. It will ruin We if The president of the Depository Bank of Zurich cannot recover Teabing's Hawker on behalf of The president of the Depository Bank of Zurich's client."  "The president of the Depository Bank of Zurich said Langdon and Sophie had a password and a key. What makes The president of the Depository Bank of Zurich say Langdon and Sophie stole Teabing's Hawker?"  "Langdon and Sophie murdered people tonight. Including Agent Neveu's grandfather. a password and a key were obviously ill-gotten." "The president of the Depository Bank of Zurich, The president of the Depository Bank of Zurich's men have done some checking into The president of the Depository Bank of Zurich's background and The president of the Depository Bank of Zurich's interests. The president of the Depository Bank of Zurich are obviously a man of great culture and refinement. The president of the Depository Bank of Zurich would imagine The president of the Depository Bank of Zurich are a man of honor, as well. As am I. That said, The president of the Depository Bank of Zurich give The president of the Depository Bank of Zurich The president of the Depository Bank of Zurich's word as commanding officer of the Police Judiciaire that The president of the Depository Bank of Zurich's , along with the Depository Bank of Zurich's reputation, are in the safest of hands."     CHAPTER    90  High in the hayloft at Chateau Villette, Collet stared at the computer monitor in amazement. "This system is eavesdropping on all these locations?"  "Yes," the agent said. "It looks like data has been collected for over a year now."  Collet read the list again, speechless.  COLBERT SOSTAQUE- Chairman of the Conseil Constitutionnel  JEAN CHAFFEE- Curator, Musee du Jeu de Paume  EDOUARD DESROCHERS- Senior Archivist, Mitterrand Library  JACQUES SAUNIERE- Curator, Musee du Louvre  MICHEL BRETON- Head of DAS (French Intelligence) the agent pointed to the computer monitor. "Number four is of obvious concern."  Collet nodded blankly. Collet had noticed it immediately. Jacques Sauniere was being bugged. Collet looked at the rest of the list again. How could anyone possibly manage to bug these prominent people? "Have Collet heard any of the audio files?"  "A few. Here's one of the most recent." the agent clicked a few computer keys. The speakers crackled to life. "Collet, un agent du Departement de Cryptographic est arrive. "  Collet could not believe Collet's ears. "That's Collet! That's Collet's voice!" Collet recalled sitting at Jacques Sauniere's desk and radioing Fache in the Grand Gallery to alert Fache in the Grand Gallery of Sophie Neveu's arrival.  the agent nodded. "A lot of our Musee du Louvre investigation tonight would have been audible if someone had been interested."  "Have the agent sent anyone in to sweep for the bug?" "No need. the agent know exactly where the bug is." the agent went to a pile of old notes and blueprints on the worktable. the agent selected a page and handed a page to Collet. "Look familiar?"  Collet was amazed. Collet was holding a photocopy of an ancient schematic diagram, which depicted a rudimentary machine. Collet was unable to read the handwritten Italian labels, and yet Collet knew what Collet was looking at. A model for a fully articulated medieval French knight.  Sophie Neveu's Sauniere's desk Collet's eyes moved to the margins, where someone had scribbled notes on a photocopy of an ancient schematic diagram, which depicted a rudimentary machine in red felt-tipped marker. The notes were in French and appeared to be ideas outlining how best to insert a listening device into Sophie Neveu's.     CHAPTER    91  Silas sat in the passenger seat of the parked Jaguar limousine near the Temple Church. Silas's hands felt damp on the keystone as Silas waited for Remy to finish tying and gagging Teabing in back with the rope they had found in the trunk.  Finally, Remy climbed out of the rear of the parked Jaguar limousine near the Temple Church, walked around, and slid into the driver's seat beside Silas.  "Secure?" Silas asked.  Remy chuckled, shaking off the rain and glancing over Remy's shoulder through the open partition at the crumpled form of Teabingthe rear of the limo. "Teabing's not going anywhere."  Silas could hear Teabing's muffled cries and realized Remy had used some of the old duct tape to gag Teabing.  "Ferme ta gueule!" Remy shouted over Remy's shoulder at Teabing. Reaching to a control panel on the elaborate dash, Remy pressed a button. An opaque partition raised behind them, sealing off the rear of the limo. Teabing disappeared, and Teabing's voice was silenced. Remy glanced at Silas. "Remy've been listening to Teabing's muffled cries long enough." Minutes later, as the parked Jaguar limousine near the Temple Church powered through the streets, Silas's cell phone rang. The Teacher. Silas answered excitedly. "Hello?" "Silas," The Teacher.'s familiar French accent said, "The Teacher. am relieved to hear Silas's voice. rang means Silas are safe."  Silas was equally comforted to hear The Teacher.. It had been hours, and the operation had veered wildly off course. Now, at last, the operation seemed to be back on track. "Silas have the keystone."  "have is superb news," The Teacher. told Silas. "Is Remy with Silas?"  Silas was surprised to hear The Teacher. use Remy's name. "Yes. Remy freed Silas."  "As The Teacher. ordered Remy to do. The Teacher. am only sorry Silas had to endure captivity for so long."  "Physical discomfort has no meaning. The important thing is that the keystone is ours."  "Yes. The Teacher. need the keystone delivered to The Teacher. at once. Time is of the essence."  Silas was eager to meet The Teacher. face-to-face at last. "Yes, The Teacher., Silas would be honored."  "Silas, The Teacher. would like Remy to bring the keystone to The Teacher.."  Remy? Silas was crestfallen. After everything Silas had done for The Teacher., Silas had believed Silas would be the one to hand over the keystone. The Teacher. favors Remy?  "The Teacher. sense Silas's disappointment," The Teacher. said, "which tells The Teacher. Silas do not understand The Teacher.'s meaning." The Teacher. lowered The Teacher.'s voice to a whisper. "Silas must believe that The Teacher. would much prefer to receive the keystone from Silas - but Remy must be dealt with. Remy disobeyed The Teacher.'s orders and made a grave mistake that has put ours's entire mission at risk. "  Silas felt a chill and glanced over at Remy. Kidnapping Teabing had not been part of the plan, and deciding what to do with Remy posed a new problem.  "ours are men of God," The Teacher. whispered. "ours cannot be deterred from ours's goal." There was an ominous pause on the line. "For this reason alone, The Teacher. will ask Remy to bring The Teacher. the keystone. Do Silas understand?"  Silas sensed anger in The Teacher.'s voice and was surprised Remy was not more understanding. Showing Remy's face could not be avoided, Silas thought. Remy did what Remy had to do. Remy saved the keystone. "Silas understand," Silas managed.  "Good. For Silas's own safety, Silas need to get off the street immediately. The police will be looking for the parked Jaguar limousine near the Temple Church soon, and The Teacher. do not want Silas caught. Opus Dei has a residence in London, no?"  "Of course." "And Silas are welcome there?"  "As a brother."  "Then go there and stay out of sight. The Teacher. will call Silas the moment The Teacher. am in possession of the keystone and have attended to The Teacher.'s current problem. "  "The Teacher. are in London?"  "Do as The Teacher. say, and everything will be fine."  "Yes, The Teacher.."  The Teacher. heaved a sigh, as if what The Teacher. now had to do was profoundly regrettable. "It's time The Teacher. speak to Remy."  Silas handed Remy the phone, sensing it might be the last call Remy ever took. As Remy took the phone, Remy knew Remy had no idea what fate awaited Remy now that Remy had served Remy's purpose.  The Teacher. used Silas, Silas.  And Silas's bishop is a pawn.  Remy still marveled at The Teacher.'s powers of persuasion. Bishop Aringarosa had trusted everything. Bishop Aringarosa had been blinded by Bishop Aringarosa's own desperation. Bishop Aringarosa was far too eager to believe. Although Remy did not particularly like The Teacher., Remy felt pride at having gained The Teacher.'s trust and helped The Teacher. so substantially. / have earned Remy's payday.  "Listen carefully," The Teacher. said. "Take Silas to the Opus Dei residence hall and drop Silas off a few streets away. Then drive to St. James's Park. St. James's Park is adjacent to Parliament and Big Ben. Silas can park the parked Jaguar limousine near the Temple Church on Horse Guards Parade. We'll talk there."  With that, the connection went dead.     CHAPTER    92 King's College, established by King George IV in 1829, houses King's College, established by King George IV in 1829,'s Department of Theology and Religious Studies adjacent to Parliament on property granted by the Crown. its Department of Theology and Religious Studies boasts not only 150 years' experience in teaching and research, but the 1982 establishment of the Research Institute in Systematic Theology, which possesses one of the most complete and electronically advanced religious research libraries in the world.  Langdon still felt shaky as Langdon and Sophie came in from the rain and entered the library. The primary research room was as Teabing had described it - a dramatic octagonal chamber dominated by an enormous round table around which King Arthur and King Arthur's knights might have been comfortable were it not for the presence of twelve flat-screen computer workstations. On the far side of The primary research room, a reference librarian was just pouring a pot of tea and settling in for a reference librarian's day of work.  "Lovely morning," a reference librarian said in a cheerful British accent, leaving a pot of tea and walking over. "May a reference librarian help Langdon?"  "Thank a reference librarian, yes," Langdon replied. "Langdon's name is - "  "Langdon." a reference librarian gave a pleasant smile. "a reference librarian know who Langdon are."  For an instant, Langdon feared Fache had put Langdon on English television as well, but a reference librarian's smile suggested otherwise. Langdon still had not gotten used to these moments of unexpected celebrity. Then again, if anyone on earth were going to recognize Langdon's face, anyone on earth would be a reference librarian.  "Pamela Gettum," a reference librarian said, offering a reference librarian's hand. a reference librarian had a genial, erudite face and a pleasingly fluid voice. The horn-rimmed glasses hanging around a reference librarian's neck were thick.  "A pleasure," Langdon said. "Sophie is Sophie."  The two women greeted one another, and a reference librarian turned immediately back to Langdon. "a reference librarian didn't know Langdon were coming."  "Neither did he and Sophie. If it's not too much trouble, he and Sophie could really use a reference librarian's help finding some information."  a reference librarian shifted, looking uncertain. "Normally our services are by petition and appointment only, unless of course Langdon're the guest of someone at King's College, established by King George IV in 1829,?"  Langdon shook Langdon's head. "Langdon'm afraid he and Sophie've come unannounced. A friend of Langdon speaks very highly of a reference librarian. Sir Leigh Teabing?" Langdon felt a pang of gloom as Langdon said the name. "The British Royal Historian." a reference librarian brightened now, laughing. "Heavens, yes. What a character. Fanatical! Every time Langdon comes in, it's always the same search strings. Grail. Grail. Grail. a reference librarian swear Langdon will die before Langdon gives up on that quest." a reference librarian winked. "Time and money afford one such lovely luxuries, wouldn't Langdon say? A regular Don Quixote, that one."  "Is there any chance a reference librarian can help he and Sophie?" Sophie asked. "It's quite important."  a reference librarian glanced around the library and then winked at he and Sophie. "Well, a reference librarian can't very well claim a reference librarian'm too busy, now can a reference librarian? As long as Sophie sign in, a reference librarian can't imagine anyone being too upset. What did Sophie have in mind?"  "he and Sophie're trying to find a tomb in London."  a reference librarian looked dubious. "he and Sophie've got about twenty thousand of them. Can Sophie be a little more specific?"  "a tomb in London's the tomb of a knight. he and Sophie don't have a name."  "A knight. That tightens the net substantially. Much less common."  "he and Sophie don't have much information about a knight," Sophie said, "but this is what he and Sophie know." Sophie produced a slip of paper on which Sophie had written only the first two lines of the poem.  Hesitant to show the poem to an outsider, he and Sophie had decided to share only the first two lines of the poem. Compartmentalized cryptography, Sophie had called Compartmentalized cryptography. When an intelligence agency intercepted a code containing sensitive data, cryptographers each worked on a discrete section of a code containing sensitive data. This way, when cryptographers broke a code containing sensitive data, no single cryptographer possessed the entire deciphered message.  In this case, the precaution was probably excessive; even if a reference librarian saw the poem, identified a knight's , and knew what orb was missing, the information was useless without the cryptex. a reference librarian sensed an urgency in the eyes of Langdon, almost as if Langdon's finding a tomb in London quickly were a matter of critical importance. The green-eyed woman accompanying Langdon also seemed anxious.  Puzzled, a reference librarian put on a reference librarian's glasses and examined a slip of paper on which she had written only the first two lines of the poem.  In London lies a knight a Pope interred. a knight's labor's fruit a Holy wrath incurred.  a reference librarian glanced at he and Sophie. "What is this? Some kind of Harvard scavenger hunt?"  Langdon's laugh sounded forced. "Yeah, something like that."  a reference librarian paused, feeling a reference librarian was not getting the whole story. Nonetheless, a reference librarian felt intrigued and found a reference librarian pondering the poem carefully. "According to this rhyme, a knight did something that incurred displeasure with God, and yet a Pope was kind enough to bury a knight in London."  Langdon nodded. "Does this rhyme ring any bells?"  a reference librarian moved toward one of the workstations. "Not offhand, but let's see what 's can pull up in the database."  Over the past two decades, King's College Research Institute in Systematic Theology had used optical character recognition software in unison with linguistic translation devices to digitize and catalog an enormous collection of texts - encyclopedias of religion, religious biographies, sacred scriptures in dozens of languages, histories, Vatican letters, diaries of clerics, anything at all that qualified as writings on human spirituality. Because the massive collection was now in the form of bits and bytes rather than physical pages, the data was infinitely more accessible.  Settling into one of the workstations, a reference librarian eyed a slip of paper on which she had written only the first two lines of the poem and began typing. "To begin, 's'll run a straight Boolean with a few obvious keywords and see what happens."  "Thank a reference librarian."  a reference librarian typed in a few words:  London, KNIGHT, POPE  As a reference librarian clicked the SEARCH button, a reference librarian could feel the hum of the massive mainframe downstairs scanning data at a rate of 500 MB/sec. "a reference librarian'm asking the massive mainframe downstairs scanning data at a rate of 500 MB/sec to show 's any documents whose complete text contains all three of a few words:  LONDON, KNIGHT, POPE. 's'll get more hits than 's want, but it's a good place to start. "  The screen was already showing the first of the hits now.  Painting a Pope. The Collected Portraits of Sir Joshua Reynolds. London University Press. a reference librarian shook a reference librarian's head. "Obviously not what you're looking for." a reference librarian scrolled to the next hit. The London Writings of Alexander Pope by G. Wilson Knight.  Again a reference librarian shook a reference librarian's head.  As the massive mainframe downstairs scanning data at a rate of 500 MB/sec churned on, the hits came up more quickly than usual. Dozens of texts appeared, many of Dozens of texts referencing the eighteenth-century British writer Alexander Pope, whose counterreligious, mock-epic poetry apparently contained plenty of references to knights and London.  a reference librarian shot a quick glance to the numeric field at the bottom of The screen. This computer, by calculating the current number of hits and multiplying by the percentage of the database left to search, provided a rough guess of how much information would be found. This particular search looked like This particular search was going to return an obscenely large amount of data.  Estimated number of total hits: 2,692 "'s need to refine the parameters further," a reference librarian said, stopping This particular search. "Is this all the information a reference librarian have regarding a tomb in London? There's nothing else to go on?"  Langdon glanced at Sophie, looking uncertain.  This is no scavenger hunt, a reference librarian sensed. a reference librarian had heard the whisperings of Langdon's experience in Rome last year. Langdon had been granted access to the libraryVatican . a reference librarian wondered what kinds of secrets Langdon might have learned inside and if Langdon's current desperate hunt for a tomb in London London might relate to information Langdon had gained within Vatican. a reference librarian had been a librarian long enough to know the most common reason people came to London to look for knights. The Grail.  a reference librarian smiled and adjusted her glasses. "he and Sophie are friends with Leigh Teabing, he and Sophie are in England, and he and Sophie are looking for a knight." a reference librarian folded a reference librarian's hands. "a reference librarian can only assume he and Sophie are on a The Grail. quest."  he and Sophie exchanged startled looks.  a reference librarian laughed. "he and Sophie, the library is a base camp for Grail seekers. Leigh Teabing among Grail seekers. a reference librarian wish a reference librarian had a shilling for every time a reference librarian'd run searches for the Rose, Mary Magdalene, Sangreal, Merovingian, Priory of Sion, et cetera, et cetera. Everyone loves a conspiracy." a reference librarian took off her glasses and eyed her glasses. "a reference librarian need more information." In the silence, a reference librarian sensed he and Sophie's desire for discretion was quickly being outweighed by he and Sophie's eagerness for a fast result.  "Here," Sophie blurted. "this is everything he and Sophie know." Borrowing a pen from Langdon, Sophie wrote two more lines on a slip of paper on which she had written only the first two lines of the poem and handed a slip of paper on which she had written only the first two lines of the poem to a reference librarian.  You seek a tomb in Londona knight's . this rhyme speaks of Rosy flesh and seeded womb. a reference librarian gave an inward smile. The Grail. indeed, a reference librarian thought, noting the references to the Rose and seeded womb. "a reference librarian can help he and Sophie," a reference librarian said, looking up from a slip of paper on which she had written only the first two lines of the poem. "Might a reference librarian ask where this rhyme came from? And why a reference librarian are seeking an orb?"  "a reference librarian might ask," Langdon said, with a friendly smile, "but it's a long story and he and Sophie have very little time."  "Sounds like a polite way of saying 'mind your own business.' "  "he and Sophie would be forever in a reference librarian's debt, a reference librarian," Langdon said, "if a reference librarian could find out who a knight is and where a knight is buried."  "Very well," a reference librarian said, typing again. "a reference librarian'll play along. If this is a The Grail.-related issue, 's should cross-reference against The Grail. keywords. a reference librarian'll add a proximity parameter and remove the title weighting. That will limit 's's hits only to those instances of textual keywords that occur near a The Grail.-related word."  Search for: a knight, London, a Pope, a tomb in London Within 100 word proximity of: The Grail., the Rose, SANGREAL, CHALICE "How long will this take?" Sophie asked.  "A few hundred terabytes with multiple cross-referencing fields?" a reference librarian's eyes glimmered as a reference librarian clicked the SEARCH key. "A mere fifteen minutes."  he and Sophie said nothing, but a reference librarian sensed A mere fifteen minutes sounded like an eternity to he and Sophie.  "Tea?" a reference librarian asked, standing and walking toward the pot a reference librarian had made earlier. "Leigh always loves a reference librarian's tea. "     CHAPTER    93  London's Opus Dei Centre is a modest brick building at 5 Orme Court, overlooking the North Walk at Kensington Gardens. Silas had never been here, but Silas felt a rising sense of refuge and asylum as Silas approached 93  London's Opus Dei Centre on foot. Despite the rain, Remy had dropped Silas off a short distance away in order to keep the limousine off the main streets. Silas didn't mind the walk. the rain was cleansing.  At Remy's suggestion, Silas had wiped down Silas's gun and disposed of his gun through a sewer grate. Silas was glad to get rid of his gun. Silas felt lighter. Silas's legs still ached from being bound all that time, but Silas had endured far greater pain. Silas wondered, though, about Teabing, whom Remy had left bound in the back of the limousine. Teabing, whom Remy had left bound in the back of the limousine certainly had to be feeling the pain by now.  "What will Remy do with Teabing, whom Remy had left bound in the back of the limousine?" Silas had asked Remy as they drove over here.  Remy had shrugged. "That is a decision for Silas." There was an odd finality in Remy's tone.  Now, as Silas approached 93  London's Opus Dei Centre, the rain began to fall harder, soaking Silas's heavy robe, stinging the wounds of the day before. Silas was ready to leave behind the sins of the last twenty-four hours and purge Silas's soul. Silas's work was done.  Moving across a small courtyard to the front door, Silas was not surprised to find the front door unlocked. Silas opened the front door and stepped into the minimalist foyer. A muted electronic chime sounded upstairs as Silas stepped onto the carpet. A muted electronic chime was a common feature in these halls where the residents spent most of the day in the residents's rooms in prayer. Silas could hear movement above on the creaky wood floors.  A man in a cloak came downstairs. "May A man in a cloak help Silas?" A man in a cloak had kind eyes that seemed not even to register Silas's startling physical appearance.  "Thank A man in a cloak. Silas's name is Silas. Silas am an Opus Dei numerary."  "American?"  Silas nodded. "Silas am in town only for the day. Might Silas rest here?"  "Silas need not even ask. There are two empty rooms on the third floor. Shall A man in a cloak bring Silas some tea and bread?"  "Thank A man in a cloak." Silas was famished.  Silas went upstairs to a modest room with a window, where Silas took off his heavy robe and knelt down to pray in Silas's undergarments. Silas heard Silas's host come up and lay a tray outside Silas's door. Silas finished pray, ate Silas's food, and lay down to sleep. Three stories below, a phone was ringing. The Opus Dei numerary who had welcomed Silas answered the line.  "This is the London police," the caller said. "We are trying to find an albino monk. We've had a tip- off that an albino monk might be there. Have The Opus Dei numerary who had welcomed Silas seen an albino monk?"  The Opus Dei numerary who had welcomed Silas was startled. "Yes, an albino monk is here. Is something wrong?"  "an albino monk is there now?"  "Yes, upstairs praying. What is going on?"  "Leave an albino monk precisely where an albino monk is," the officer commanded. "Don't say a word to anyone. the officer'm sending officers over right away. "     CHAPTER    94  St. James's Park is a sea of green in the middle of London, a public park bordering the palaces of Westminster, Buckingham, and St. James's. Once enclosed by King Henry VIII and stocked with deer for the hunt, St. James's Park is now open to the public. On sunny afternoons, Londoners picnic beneath the willows and feed the pond's resident pelicans, whose ancestors were a gift to Charles II from the Russian ambassador.  The Teacher saw no pelicans today. The stormy weather had brought instead seagulls from the ocean. The lawns were covered with seagulls from the ocean - hundreds of white bodies all facing the same direction, patiently riding out the damp wind. Despite the morning fog, St. James's Park afforded splendid views of the Houses of Parliament and Big Ben. Gazing across The lawns, past the pond's and the delicate silhouettes of the willows, The Teacher could see the spires of the building that housed the knight's tomb - the real reason The Teacher had told Remy to come to this spot.  As The Teacher approached the front passenger door of the parked limousine, Remy leaned across and opened the front passenger door of the parked limousine. The Teacher paused outside, taking a pull from the flask of cognac Remy was carrying. Then, dabbing The Teacher's mouth, The Teacher slid in beside Remy and closed the front passenger door of the parked limousine.  Remy held up the keystone like a trophy. "the keystone was almost lost."  "Remy have done well," The Teacher said. "We have done well," Remy replied, laying the keystone in The Teacher's eager hands.  The Teacher admired the keystone a long moment, smiling. "And the gun? Remy wiped the gun down?"  "Back in the glove box where Remy found the gun."  "Excellent." The Teacher took another drink of cognac and handed the flask of cognac he was carrying to Remy. "Let's toast We's success. The end is near." Remy accepted the flask of cognac he was carrying gratefully. cognac tasted salty, but Remy didn't care. We were truly partners now. Remy could feel Remy ascending to a higher station in life. / will never be a servant again. As Remy gazed down the embankment at the pond's, Chateau Villette seemed miles away.  Taking another swig from the flask of cognac he was carrying, Remy could feel cognac warming Remy's blood. The warmth in Remy's throat, however, mutated quickly to an uncomfortable heat. Loosening Remy's bow tie, Remy tasted an unpleasant grittiness and handed the flask of cognac he was carrying back to The Teacher. "Remy've probably had enough," Remy managed, weakly.  Taking the flask of cognac he was carrying, The Teacher said, "Remy, as Remy are aware, Remy are the only one who knows The Teacher's face. The Teacher placed enormous trust in Remy."  "Yes," Remy said, feeling feverish as Remy loosened his bow tie further. "And The Teacher's identity shall go with Remy to the grave."  The Teacher was silent a long moment. "The Teacher believe Remy." Pocketing the flask of cognac he was carrying and the keystone, The Teacher reached for the glove box and pulled out the gun. For an instant, Remy felt a surge of fear, but The Teacher simply slipped the gun in The Teacher's trousers pocket.  What is The Teacher doing? Remy felt Remy sweating suddenly.  "The Teacher know The Teacher promised Remy freedom," The Teacher said, The Teacher's voice now sounding regretful. "But considering Remy's circumstances, this is the best The Teacher can do."  The swelling in Remy's throat came on like an earthquake, and Remy lurched against the steering column, grabbing Remy's throat and tasting vomit in Remy's narrowing esophagus. Remy let out a muted croak of a scream, not even loud enough to be heard outside the parked limousine. The saltiness in cognac now registered.  Remy'm being murdered! Incredulous, Remy turned to see The Teacher sitting calmly beside Remy, staring straight ahead out the windshield. Remy's eyesight blurred, and Remy gasped for breath. Remy made everything possible for The Teacher! How could The Teacher do this! Whether The Teacher had intended to kill Remy all along or whether it had been Remy's actions in the Temple Church that had made The Teacher lose faith, Remy would never know. Terror and rage coursed through Remy now. Remy tried to lunge for The Teacher, but Remy's stiffening body could barely move. / trusted The Teacher with everything!  Remy tried to lift Remy's clenched fists to blow the horn, but instead Remy slipped sideways, rolling onto the seat, lying on Remy's side beside The Teacher, clutching at Remy's throat. The rain fell harder now. Remy could no longer see, but Remy could sense Remy's oxygen-deprived brain straining to cling to Remy's last faint shreds of lucidity. As Remy's world slowly went black, Remy could have sworn Remy heard the sounds of the soft Riviera surf. The Teacher stepped from the parked limousine, pleased to see that nobody was looking in The Teacher's direction. / had no choice, The Teacher told The Teacher, surprised how little remorse The Teacher felt for what The Teacher had just done. Remy sealed Remy's own fate. The Teacher had feared all along that Remy might need to be eliminated when the mission was complete, but by brazenly showing Remy in the Temple Church, Remy had accelerated the necessity dramatically. Remy's unexpected visit to Chateau Villette had brought The Teacher both a fortuitous windfall and an intricate dilemma. Remy had delivered the keystone directly to the heart of the operation, which was a pleasant surprise, and yet Remy had brought the police on Remy's tail. Remy's prints were all over Chateau Villette, as well as in the barn's listening post, where Remy had carried out the surveillance. The Teacher was grateful The Teacher had taken so much care in preventing any ties between Remy's activities and The Teacher's own. Nobody could implicate The Teacher unless Remy talked, and that was no longer a concern.  One more loose end to tie up here, The Teacher thought, moving now toward the rear door of the parked limousine. the police will have no idea what happened... and no living witness left to tell the police. Glancing around to ensure nobody was watching, The Teacher pulled open the rear door of the limousine and climbed into the spacious rear compartment. Minutes later, The Teacher was crossing St. James's Park. Only two people now remain. Only two people Only two people were more complicated. But manageable. At the moment, however, The Teacher had the cryptex to attend to.  Gazing triumphantly across St. James's Park, The Teacher could see The Teacher's destination. In London lies a knight a Pope interred. As soon as The Teacher had heard the poem, The Teacher had known the answer. Even so, that the others had not figured the answer out was not surprising. / have an unfair advantage. Having listened to Sauniere's conversations for months now, The Teacher had heard Sauniere's mention a knight a Pope interred on occasion, expressing esteem almost matching that Sauniere's held for Da Vinci. the poem's reference to a knight a Pope interred was brutally simple once one saw The poem's reference to the knight - a credit to Sauniere's's wit - and yet how the knight's tomb would reveal the final password was still a mystery.  You seek the orb that ought be on the knight's tomb.  The Teacher vaguely recalled photos of the knight's tomb and, in particular, the knight's tomb's most distinguishing feature. its most distinguishing feature the orb that ought be on his tomb was almost as large as the knight's tombthe knight's tomb. The presence of its most distinguishing feature seemed both encouraging and troubling to The Teacher. On one hand, its most distinguishing feature felt like a signpost, and yet, according to the poem, the missing piece of the puzzle was an orb that ought to be on the knight's tomb... not one that was already there. The Teacher was counting on The Teacher's closer inspection of the knight's tomb to unveil the answer.  The rain was getting heavier now, and The Teacher tucked the flask of cognac he was carrying deep in The Teacher's right-hand pocket to protect the flask of cognac he was carrying from the dampness. The Teacher kept the gun in The Teacher's left, out of sight. Within minutes, The Teacher was stepping into the quiet sanctuary of the building that housed the knight's tomb. Just as The Teacher was stepping out of The rain, Bishop Aringarosa was stepping into The rain. On the rainy tarmac at Biggin Hill Executive Airport, Bishop Aringarosa emerged from Bishop Aringarosa's cramped plane, bundling Bishop Aringarosa's cassock against the cold damp. Bishop Aringarosa had hoped to be greeted by Captain Fache. Instead a young British police officer approached with an umbrella.  "Bishop Aringarosa? Captain Fache had to leave. Captain Fache asked a young British police officer to look after Bishop Aringarosa. Captain Fache suggested a young British police officer take Bishop Aringarosa to Scotland Yard. Captain Fache thought it would be safest."  Safest? Bishop Aringarosa looked down at the heavy briefcase of Vatican bonds clutched in Bishop Aringarosa's hand. Bishop Aringarosa had almost forgotten. "Yes, thank a young British police officer."  Bishop Aringarosa climbed into the police car, wondering where Silas could be. Minutes later, the police scanner crackled with the answer.  5 Orme Court.  Bishop Aringarosa recognized 5 Orme Court. instantly.  The Opus Dei Centre in London.  Bishop Aringarosa spun to the driver. "Take Bishop Aringarosa there at once!"     CHAPTER    95  Langdon's eyes had not left the computer screen since the search began.  Five minutes. Only two hits. Both irrelevant.  Langdon's was starting to get worried.  Pamela Gettum was in the adjoining room, preparing hot drinks. Langdon's and Sophie had inquired unwisely if there might be some coffee brewing alongside the tea Pamela Gettum had offered, and from the sound of the microwave beeps in the next room, Langdon's suspected Langdon and Sophie's request was about to be rewarded with instant Nescafe.  Finally, the computer pinged happily.  "Sounds like Langdon and Sophie got another," Pamela Gettum called from the next room. "What's the title?"  Langdon's eyed the computer screen.  Grail Allegory in Medieval Literature: A Treatise on Sir Gawain and the Green Knight.  "Allegory of the Green Knight," Langdon's called back.  "No good," Pamela Gettum said. "Not many mythological green giants buried in London."  Langdon and Sophie Sophie sat patiently in front of the computer screen and waited through two more dubious returns. When the computer pinged again, though, the offering was unexpected.  DIE OPERN VON RICHARD WAGNER "The operas of DIE OPERN VON RICHARD WAGNER?" Sophie asked.  Pamela Gettum peeked back in the doorway, holding a packet of instant coffee. "That seems like a strange match. Was DIE OPERN VON RICHARD WAGNER a knight?"  "No," Langdon's said, feeling a sudden intrigue. "But DIE OPERN VON RICHARD WAGNER was a well-known Freemason." Along with Mozart, Beethoven, Shakespeare, Gershwin, Houdini, and Disney. Volumes had been written about the ties between the Masons and the Knights Templar, the Priory of Sion, and the Holy Grail. "Sophie want to look at this one. How do Sophie see the full text?" "Sophie don't want the full text," Pamela Gettum called. "Click on the hypertext title. the computer will display your keyword hits along with mono prelogs and triple postlogs for context."  Langdon's had no idea what Pamela Gettum had just said, but Langdon's clicked anyway.  A new window popped up.  . . .mythological knight named Parsifal who. . .  ...metaphorical the Holy Grail quest that arguably...  ...the London Philharmonic in 1855...  Rebecca Pope's opera anthology "Diva's...  ...DIE OPERN VON RICHARD WAGNER's tomb in Bayreuth, Germany... "Wrong Pope," Langdon's said, disappointed. Even so, Langdon's was amazed by the computer's ease of use. The keywords with context were enough to remind Langdon's that DIE OPERN VON RICHARD WAGNER's opera Parsifal was a tribute to Mary Magdalene and the bloodline of Jesus Christ, told through the story of a young knight on a quest for truth.  "Just be patient," Pamela Gettum urged. "It's a numbers game. Let the computer run."  Over the next few minutes, the computer returned several more the Holy Grail references, including a text about troubadours - France's famous wandering minstrels. Langdon's knew it was no coincidence that the word minstrel and minister shared an etymological root. troubadours - France's famous wandering minstrels were the traveling servants or "ministers" of the Church of Mary Magdalene, using music to disseminate the story of the sacred feminine among the common folk. To this day, troubadours - France's famous wandering minstrels sang songs extolling the virtues of "our Lady" - a mysterious and beautiful woman to whom troubadours - France's famous wandering minstrels pledged troubadours - France's famous wandering minstrels forever.  Eagerly, Langdon's checked the hypertext but found nothing.  the computer pinged again.  KNIGHTS, KNAVES, POPES, AND PENTACLES: THE HISTORY OF the Holy Grail  THROUGH TAROT "Not surprising," Langdon's said to Sophie. "Some of our keywords have the same names as individual cards." Langdon's reached for the mouse to click on a hyperlink. "Langdon's'm not sure if Sophie's grandfather ever mentioned it when Sophie played TAROT with your grandfather, Sophie, but TAROT is a 'flash- card catechism' into the story of the Lost Bride and the Lost Bride's subjugation by the evil Church."  Sophie eyed Langdon's, looking incredulous. "Sophie had no idea." "That's the point. By teaching through a metaphorical game, the followers of the Holy Grail disguised the followers of the Grail's message from the watchful eye of the evil Church." Langdon's often wondered how many modern card players had any clue that their four suits - spades, hearts, clubs, diamonds - were the Holy Grail-related symbols that came directly from Tarot's four suits of swords, cups, scepters, and pentacles.  Spades were Swords - The blade. Male.  Hearts were Cups - The chalice. Feminine.  Clubs were Scepters - The Royal Line. The flowering staff.  Diamonds were Pentacles - The goddess. The sacred feminine. Four minutes later, as Langdon's began feeling fearful they would not find what they had come for, the computer produced another hit.  The Gravity of Genius: Biography of a Modern Knight. "Gravity of Genius?" Langdon's called out to Pamela Gettum. "Bio of a modern knight?"  Pamela Gettum stuck Pamela Gettum's head around the corner. "How modern? Please don't tell Pamela Gettum a modern knight's Langdon's's Sir Rudy Giuliani. Personally, Pamela Gettum found that one a bit off the mark."  Langdon's had Langdon's's own qualms about the newly knighted Sir Mick Jagger, but this hardly seemed the moment to debate the politics of modern British knighthood. "Let's have a look." Langdon's summoned up the hypertext keywords.  ... honorable knight, Sir Isaac Newton...  ... in London in 1727 and. . .  . . . honorable knight, Sir Isaac Newton's tomb in Westminster Abbey. . .  ... Alexander Pope, friend and colleague... "Sophie guess 'modern' is a relative term," Sophie called to Pamela Gettum. "this one's an old book. About honorable knight, Sir Isaac Newton."  Pamela Gettum shook Pamela Gettum's head in the doorway. "No good. honorable knight, Sir Isaac Newton was buried in Westminster Abbey. There's no way a Catholic Pope was present. Cream and sugar?"  Sophie nodded. Pamela Gettum waited. "Robert?"  Langdon's's heart was hammering. Langdon's pulled Langdon's's eyes from the computer screen and stood up. "honorable knight, Sir Isaac Newton is our knight."  Sophie remained seated. "What are Langdon's talking about?"  "honorable knight, Sir Isaac Newton is buried in London," Langdon's said. "honorable knight, Sir Isaac Newton's labors produced new sciences that incurred the wrath of the evil Church. And honorable knight, Sir Isaac Newton was a Grand Master of the Priory of Sion. What more could our want?"  "What more?" Sophie pointed to the poem. "How about a knight a Pope interred? You heard Pamela Gettum. honorable knight, Sir Isaac Newton was not buried by a Catholic Pope."  Langdon's reached for the mouse. "Who said anything about a Catholic Pope?" Langdon's clicked on the "Pope" hyperlink, and the complete sentence appeared.  his tomb in Westminster Abbey, was presided  over by Alexander Pope, friend and colleague, who gave a stirring  eulogy before sprinkling dirt on the tomb. Langdon's looked at Sophie. "We had the correct Pope on We's second hit. Alexander." Langdon's paused. "A.Pope."  In London lies a knight A. Pope interred.  Sophie stood up, looking stunned.  Jacques Sauniere, the master of double-entendres, had proven once again that Jacques Sauniere, the master of double-entendres was a frighteningly clever man.     CHAPTER    96  Silas awoke with a start.  Silas had no idea what had awoken Silas or how long Silas had been asleep. Was Silas dreaming? Sitting up now on Silas's straw mat, Silas listened to the quiet breathing of the Opus Dei residence hall, the stillness textured only by the soft murmurs of someone praying aloud in a room below Silas. These were familiar sounds and should have comforted Silas.  And yet Silas felt a sudden and unexpected wariness.  Standing, wearing only Silas's undergarments, Silas walked to the window. Was Silas followed? The courtyard below was deserted, exactly as Silas had seen The courtyard below when Silas entered. Silas listened. Silence. So why am Silas uneasy? Long ago Silas had learned to trust Silas's intuition. his intuition had kept Silas alive as a child on the streets of Marseilles long before prison... long before Silas was born again by the hand of Bishop Aringarosa. Peering out the window, Silas now saw the faint outline of a car through the hedge. On a car's roof was a police siren. A floorboard creaked in the hallway. A door latch moved.  Silas reacted on instinct, surging across the room and sliding to a stop just behind the door as the door crashed open. The first police officer stormed through, swinging The first police officer's gun left then right at what appeared an empty room. Before The first police officer realized where Silas was, Silas had thrown Silas's shoulder into the door, crushing a second officer as a second officer came through. As The first police officer wheeled to shoot, Silas dove for Silas's legs. his gun went off, the bullet sailing above Silas's head, just as Silas connected with The first police officer's shins, driving his legs out from under The first police officer, and sending The first police officer down, The first police officer's head hitting the floor. a second officer staggered to a second officer's feet in the doorway, and Silas drove a knee into a second officer's groin, then went clambering over the writhing body into the hall.  Almost naked, Silas hurled the writhing body down the staircase. Silas knew Silas had been betrayed, but by whom? When Silas reached the foyer, more officers were surging through the front door. Silas turned the other way and dashed deeper into the Opus Dei residence hall. The women 's entrance. Every Opus Dei building has one. Winding down narrow hallways, Silas snaked through a kitchen, past terrified workers, who left to avoid Silas as Silas knocked over bowls and silverware, bursting into a dark hallway near the boiler room. Silas now saw The women 's entrance., an exit light gleaming at the end.  Running full speed through The women 's entrance. out into the rain, Silas leapt off the low landing, not seeing The first police officer coming the other way until it was too late. The two men collided, Silas's broad, naked shoulder grinding into The first police officer's sternum with crushing force. Silas drove The first police officer backward onto the pavement, landing hard on top of The first police officer. his gun clattered away. Silas could hear men running down the hall shouting. Rolling, Silas grabbed the loose gun just as the officers emerged. A shot rang out on the staircase, and Silas felt a searing pain below Silas's ribs. Filled with rage, Silas opened fire at the officers, the officers's blood spraying.  A dark shadow loomed behind, coming out of nowhere. The angry hands that grabbed at Silas's bare shoulders felt as if The angry hands that grabbed at his bare shoulders were infused with the power of the devil the devil himself. The first police officer roared in Silas's ear. Silas, NO!  Silas spun and fired. Their eyes met. Silas was already screaming in horror as Bishop Aringarosa fell.     CHAPTER    97  More than three thousand people are entombed or enshrined within Westminster Abbey. The colossal stone interior burgeons with the remains of kings, statesmen, scientists, poets, and musicians. kings, statesmen, scientists, poets, and musicians's tombs, packed into every last niche and alcove, range in grandeur from the most regal of mausoleums - that of Queen Elizabeth I, whose canopied sarcophagus inhabits its own private, apsidal chapel - down to the most modest etched floor tiles whose inscriptions have worn away with centuries of foot traffic, leaving it to one's imagination whose relics might lie below the tile in the undercroft.  Designed in the style of the great cathedrals of Amiens, Chartres, and Canterbury, Westminster Abbey is considered neither cathedral nor parish church. Westminster Abbey bears the classification of royal peculiar, subject only to the Sovereign. Since hosting the coronation of William the Conqueror on Christmas Day in 1066, Westminster Abbey has witnessed an endless procession of royal ceremonies and affairs of state - from the canonization of Edward the Confessor, to the marriage of Prince Andrew and Sarah Ferguson, to the funerals of Henry V, Queen Elizabeth I, whose canopied sarcophagus inhabits its own private, apsidal chapel, and Lady Diana.  Even so, Robert Langdon currently felt no interest in any of Westminster Abbey's ancient history, save one event - the funeral of the British knight Sir Isaac Newton.  In London lies a knight a Pope interred.  Hurrying through the grand portico on the north transept, Robert Langdon and Sophie were met by guards who politely ushered Langdon and Sophie through Westminster Abbey's newest addition - a large walk-through metal detector - now present in most historic buildings in London. Langdon and Sophie passed through without setting off the alarm and continued to the Westminster Abbey entrance.  Stepping across the threshold into Westminster Abbey, Robert Langdon felt the outside world evaporate with a sudden hush. No rumble of traffic. No hiss of rain. Just a deafening silence, which seemed to reverberate back and forth as if Westminster Abbey were whispering to Westminster Abbey.  Langdon and Sophie's eyes, like those of almost every visitor, shifted immediately skyward, where Westminster Abbey's great abyss seemed to explode overhead. Gray stone columns ascended like redwoods into the shadows, arching gracefully over dizzying expanses, and then shooting back down to the stone floor. Before Langdon and Sophie, the wide alley of the north transept stretched out like a deep canyon, flanked by sheer cliffs of stained glass. On sunny days, the stone floor was a prismatic patchwork of light. Today, the rain and darkness gave Westminster Abbey a wraithlike aura... more like that of the crypt Westminster Abbey truly was. "Westminster Abbey's practically empty," Sophie whispered.  Robert Langdon felt disappointed. Robert Langdon had hoped for a lot more people. A more public place. Langdon and Sophie's earlier experience in the deserted Temple Church was not one Robert Langdon wanted to repeat. Robert Langdon had been anticipating a certain feeling of security in Westminster Abbey, but Robert Langdon's recollections of bustling throngs in a well-lit abbey had been formed during the peak summer tourist season. Today was a rainy April morning. Rather than crowds and shimmering stained glass, all Robert Langdon saw was acres of desolate floor and shadowy, empty alcoves.  "Langdon and Sophie passed through metal detectors," Sophie reminded, apparently sensing Robert Langdon's apprehension. "If anyone is in here, anyone can't be armed."  Robert Langdon nodded but still felt circumspect. Robert Langdon had wanted to bring the London police with Langdon and Sophie, but Sophie's fears of who might be involved put a damper on any contact with the authorities. Langdon and Sophie need to recover the cryptex, Sophie had insisted. the cryptex is the key to everything.  Sophie was right, of course.  The key to getting Leigh back alive.  The key to finding the Holy Grail.  The key to learning who is behind this.  Unfortunately, Langdon and Sophie's only chance to recover the cryptex seemed to be here and now... at the tomb of Isaac Newton. Whoever held the cryptex would have to pay a visit to the tomb of Isaac Newton to decipher the final clue, and if they had not already come and gone, Sophie intended to intercept they.  Striding toward the left wall to get out of the open, Langdon and Sophie moved into an obscure side aisle behind a row of pilasters. Robert Langdon couldn't shake the image of Leigh being held captive, probably tied up in the back of Leigh's own limousine. Whoever had ordered the top Priory members killed would not hesitate to eliminate others who stood in the way. It seemed a cruel irony that Teabing - a modern British knight - was a hostage in the search for Isaac Newton.  "Which way is it?" Sophie asked, looking around.  Westminster Abbey Robert Langdon had no idea. "Langdon and Sophie should find a docent and ask."  Robert Langdon knew better than to wander aimlessly in here. Westminster Abbey was a tangled warren of mausoleums, perimeter chambers, and walk-in burial niches. Like the Louvre's Grand Gallery, Westminster Abbey had a lone point of entry - the door through which Langdon and Sophie had just passed - easy to find your way in, but impossible to find your way out. A literal tourist trap, one of Robert Langdon's befuddled colleagues had called it. Keeping architectural tradition, Westminster Abbey was laid out in the shape of a giant crucifix. Unlike most churches, however, Westminster Abbey had Westminster Abbey's entrance on the side, rather than the standard rear of the church via the narthex at the bottom of the nave. Moreover, Westminster Abbey had a series of sprawling cloisters attached. One false step through the wrong archway, and a visitor was lost in a labyrinth of outdoor passageways surrounded by high walls.  "Docents wear crimson robes," Robert Langdon said, approaching the center of the church. Peering obliquely across the towering gilded altar to the far end of the south transept, Robert Langdon saw several people crawling on several people crawling on their hands and knees's hands and knees. This prostrate pilgrimage was a common occurrence in Poets' Corner, although This prostrate pilgrimage was far less holy than This prostrate pilgrimage appeared. Tourists doing grave rubbings.  "Sophie don't see any docents," Sophie said. "Maybe Langdon and Sophie can find the tomb of Isaac Newton on Langdon and Sophie's own?"  Without a word, Robert Langdon led Sophie another few steps to the center of the church and pointed to the right.  Sophie drew a startled breath as Sophie looked down the length of the nave, the full magnitude of the church now visible. "Aah," Sophie said. "Let's find a docent." At that moment, a hundred yards down the nave, out of sight behind the choir screen, the tomb of Isaac Newton Isaac Newton had a lone visitor. a lone visitor had been scrutinizing the tomb of Isaac Newton for ten minutes now.  Isaac Newton's consisted of a massive black-marble sarcophagus on which reclined the sculpted form of Sir Isaac Newton, wearing classical costume, and leaning proudly against a stack of Isaac Newton's own books - Divinity, Chronology, Opticks, and Philosophiae Naturalis Principia Mathematica. At Isaac Newton's feet stood two winged boys holding a scroll. Behind Isaac Newton's recumbent body rose an austere pyramid. Although an austere pyramid an austere pyramid seemed an oddity, it was the giant shape mounted halfway up an austere pyramid that most intrigued a lone visitor.  An orb.  a lone visitor pondered Sauniere's beguiling riddle. You seek An orb.. An orb. was carved in basso-relievo and depicted all kinds of heavenly bodies - constellations, signs of the zodiac, comets, stars, and planets. Above An orb., the image of the Goddess of Astronomy beneath a field of stars.  Countless orbs.  a lone visitor had been convinced that once a lone visitor found the tomb of Isaac Newton, discerning An orb. would be easy. Now a lone visitor was not so sure. a lone visitor was gazing at a complicated map of the heavens. Was there a missing planet? Had some astronomical orb been omitted from a constellation? a lone visitor had no idea. Even so, a lone visitor could not help but suspect that the solution would be ingeniously clean and simple - "a knight a pope interred." What orb am a lone visitor looking for? Certainly, an advanced knowledge of astrophysics was not a prerequisite for finding the Holy Grail, was an advanced knowledge of astrophysics?  the Holy Grail speaks of Rosy flesh and seeded womb.  a lone visitor's concentration was broken by several approaching tourists. a lone visitor slipped the cryptex back in a lone visitor's pocket and watched warily as several approaching tourists went to a nearby table, left a donation in the cup, and restocked on the complimentary grave-rubbing supplies set out by the church. Armed with fresh charcoal pencils and large sheets of heavy paper, several approaching tourists headed off toward the front of the church, probably to the popular Poets' Corner to pay several approaching tourists's respects to Chaucer, Tennyson, and Dickens by rubbing furiously on Chaucer, Tennyson, and Dickens's graves.  Alone again, a lone visitor stepped closer to the tomb of Isaac Newton, scanning the tomb of Isaac Newton from bottom to top. a lone visitor began with the clawed feet beneath the tomb of Isaac Newton, moved upward past Isaac Newton, past a lone visitor's books on science, past the two boys with the two boys with their mathematical scroll's mathematical scroll, up the face of an austere pyramid to the giant orb with an austere pyramid's constellations, and finally up to Westminster Abbey's star-filled canopy.  What orb ought to be here... and yet is missing? a lone visitor touched the cryptex his pocket as if a lone visitor could somehow divine the answer from Sauniere's's crafted marble. Only five letters separate me from the Holy Grail.  Pacing now near the corner of the choir screen, a lone visitor took a deep breath and glanced up the nave toward the towering gilded altar. a lone visitor's gaze dropped from the towering gilded altar down to the bright crimson robe of an abbey docent who was being waved over by two very familiar individuals.  two very familiar individuals  Calmly, a lone visitor moved two steps back behind the choir screen. moved was fast. a lone visitor had anticipated two very familiar individuals would eventually decipher the poem's meaning and come to Isaac Newton's , but this was sooner than a lone visitor had imagined. Taking a deep breath, a lone visitor considered a lone visitor's options. a lone visitor had grown accustomed to dealing with surprises.  / am holding the cryptex.  Reaching down to a lone visitor's pocket, a lone visitor touched the second object that gave a lone visitor a lone visitor's confidence: the Medusa revolver. As expected, the church's metal detectors had blared as a lone visitor passed through with the Medusa revolver. Also as expected, the guards had backed off at once when a lone visitor glared indignantly and flashed a lone visitor's identification card. Official rank always commanded the proper respect. Although initially a lone visitor had hoped to solve the cryptex alone and avoid any further complications, a lone visitor now sensed that the arrival of two very familiar individuals was actually a welcome development. Considering the lack of success a lone visitor was having with the "orb" reference, a lone visitor might be able to use two very familiar individuals's expertise. After all, if Robert Langdon had deciphered the poem's to find the tomb of Isaac Newton, there was a reasonable chance Robert Langdon also knew something about An orb.. And if Robert Langdon knew the password, then it was just a matter of applying the right pressure.  Not here, of course.  Somewhere private.  a lone visitor recalled a small announcement sign a lone visitor had seen on a lone visitor's way into the church. Immediately a lone visitor knew the perfect place to lure two very familiar individuals.  The only question now... what to use as bait.     CHAPTER    98  Langdon and Sophie moved slowly down the north aisle, keeping to the shadows behind the ample pillars that separated the north aisle from the open nave. Despite having traveled more than halfway down the open nave, Langdon and Sophie still had no clear view of Newton's tomb. The sarcophagus was recessed in a niche, obscured from this oblique angle.  "At least there's nobody over there," Sophie whispered.  Langdon nodded, relieved. The entire section of the nave near Newton's tomb was deserted. "Langdon'll go over," Langdon whispered. "Sophie should stay hidden just in case someone - "  Sophie had already stepped from the shadows and was headed across the open floor.  " - is watching," Langdon sighed, hurrying to join Sophie.  Crossing the open nave on a diagonal, Langdon Sophie remained silent as Newton's tomb revealed Newton's tomb in tantalizing increments... The sarcophagus... a reclining statue of Newton's... two winged boys... a huge pyramid... and... an enormous orb.  "Did Langdon know about an enormous orb?" Sophie said, sounding startled.  Langdon shook Langdon's head, also surprised.  "Those look like constellations carved on an enormous orb," Sophie said. As Langdon and Sophie approached a niche, Langdon felt a slow sinking sensation. Newton's tomb was covered with orbs - stars, comets, planets. You seek an enormous orb? seek could turn out to be like trying to find a missing blade of grass on a golf course.  "Astronomical bodies," Sophie said, looking concerned. "And a lot of Astronomical bodies."  Langdon frowned. The only link between the planets and the Grail that Langdon could imagine was the pentacle of Venus, and Langdon had already tried the password "Venus" en route to the Temple Church.  Sophie moved directly to The sarcophagus, but Langdon hung back a few feet, keeping an eye on the abbey around Langdon and Sophie.  "Divinity, " Sophie said, tilting Sophie's head and reading the titles of the books on which Newton's was leaning. "Chronology. Opticks. Philosophiae Naturalis Principia Mathematica?" Sophie turned to Langdon. "Ring any bells?"  Langdon stepped closer, considering it. "Principia Mathematica, as Langdon remember, has something to do with the gravitation pull of planets... which admittedly are orbs, but it seems a little far-fetched."  "How about the signs of the zodiac?" Sophie asked, pointing to the constellations on the orb. "Langdon were talking about Pisces and Aquarius earlier, weren't Langdon?"  The End of Days, Langdon thought. "The end of Pisces and the beginning of Aquarius was allegedly the historical marker at which the Priory planned to release the Sangreal documents to the world." But the millennium came and went without incident, leaving historians uncertain when the truth was coming.  "It seems possible," Sophie said, "that planned might be related to the last line of the poem."  the last line of the poem speaks of Rosy flesh and seeded womb. Langdon felt a shiver of potential. Langdon had not considered the last line of the poem that way before.  "Langdon told Sophie earlier," Sophie said, "that the timing of planned 'the Rose''s was linked directly to the position of planets - orbs."  Langdon nodded, feeling the first faint wisps of possibility materializing. Even so, Langdon's intuition told Langdon astronomy was not the key. Newton's's previous solutions had all possessed an eloquent, symbolic significance - the Mona Lisa, Madonna of the Rocks, SOFIA. an eloquent, symbolic significance was definitely lacking in the concept of planetary orbs and the zodiac. Thus far, Newton's had proven Newton's a meticulous code writer, and Langdon had to believe that Newton's's final password - those five letters that unlocked the Priory's ultimate secret - would prove to be not only symbolically fitting but also crystal clear. If this solution were anything like The Grand Master's previous solutions, this solution would be painfully obvious once this solution dawned.  "Look!" Sophie gasped, jarring Langdon's thoughts as Sophie grabbed Langdon's arm. From the fear in Sophie's touch Langdon sensed someone must be approaching, but when Langdon turned to Sophie, Sophie was staring aghast at the top of the black marble sarcophagus. "Someone was here," Sophie whispered, pointing to a spot on The sarcophagus near Newton's's outstretched right foot.  Langdon did not understand Sophie's concern. A careless tourist had left a charcoal, grave-rubbing pencil on the sarcophagus lid near Newton's outstretched right foot. a charcoal, grave-rubbing pencil's nothing. Langdon reached out to pick a charcoal, grave-rubbing pencil up, but as Langdon leaned toward The sarcophagus, the light shifted on the polished black-marble slab, and Langdon froze. Suddenly, Langdon saw why Sophie was afraid.  Scrawled on the sarcophagus lid, at Newton's outstretched right foot, shimmered a barely visible charcoal-pencil message:  I have Teabing.  Go through Chapter House,  out south exit, to public garden. Langdon read the words twice, Langdon's heart pounding wildly.  Sophie turned and scanned the nave.  Despite the pall of trepidation that settled over Langdon upon seeing the words, Langdon told Langdon this was good news. Leigh is still alive. There was another implication here too. "They don't know the password "Venus" either," Langdon whispered.  Sophie nodded. Otherwise why make They's presence known?  "They may want to trade Leigh for the password "Venus"."  "Or it's a trap."  Langdon shook Langdon's head. "Langdon don't think so. public garden is outside the abbey walls. A very public place." Langdon had once visited abbey's famous College Garden - a small fruit orchard and herb garden - left over from the days when monks grew natural pharmacological remedies here. Boasting the oldest living fruit trees in Great Britain, public garden was a popular spot for tourists to visit without having to enter abbey. "Langdon think sending Langdon and Sophie outside is a show of faith. So Langdon and Sophie feel safe." Sophie looked dubious. "Langdon mean outside, where there are no metal detectors?"  Langdon scowled. Sophie had a point.  Gazing back at Newton's tomb, Langdon wished Langdon had some idea about the password "Venus"... something with which to negotiate. / got Leigh involved in this, and Langdon'll do whatever it takes if there is a chance to help Leigh.  "The note says to go through Chapter House to south exit," Sophie said. "Maybe from south exit Langdon and Sophie would have a view of public garden? That way Langdon and Sophie could assess the situation before Langdon and Sophie walked out there and exposed Langdon and Sophie to any danger?"  The idea was a good one. Langdon vaguely recalled Chapter House as a huge octagonal hall where the original British Parliament convened in the days before the modern Parliament building existed. It had been years since Langdon had been there, but Langdon remembered Chapter House being out through the cloister somewhere. Taking several steps back from Newton's tomb, Langdon peered around the choir screen to Langdon's right, across the nave to the side opposite that which Langdon and Sophie had descended.  A gaping vaulted passageway stood nearby, with a large sign.  THIS WAY TO:  CLOISTERS  DEANERY  COLLEGE HALL  MUSEUM  PYX CHAMBER  ST. FAITH'S CHAPEL      CHAPTER    HOUSE Langdon and Sophie were jogging as Langdon and Sophie passed beneath the sign, moving too quickly to notice the small announcement apologizing that certain areas were closed for renovations.  Langdon and Sophie emerged immediately into a high-walled, open-roof courtyard through which morning rain was falling. Above Langdon and Sophie, the wind howled across the opening with a low drone, like someone blowing over the mouth of a bottle. Entering the narrow, low-hanging walkways that bordered the courtyard perimeter, Langdon felt the familiar uneasiness Langdon always felt in enclosed spaces. the narrow, low-hanging walkways that bordered the courtyard perimeter were called cloisters, and Langdon noted with uneasiness that the narrow, low-hanging walkways that bordered the courtyard perimeter lived up to the narrow, low-hanging walkways that bordered the courtyard perimeter's Latin ties to the word claustrophobic.  Focusing Langdon's mind straight ahead toward the end of the tunnel, Langdon followed the signs for the Chapter House. The rain was spitting now, and the walkway was cold and damp with gusts of rain that blew through the lone pillared wall that was the cloister's only source of light. Another couple scurried past Langdon and Sophie the other way, hurrying to get out of the worsening weather. the narrow, low-hanging walkways that bordered the courtyard perimeter looked deserted now, admittedly the abbey's least enticing section in the wind and rain.  Forty yards down the east cloister, an archway materialized on Langdon and Sophie's left, giving way to another hallway. Although an archway was the entrance Langdon and Sophie were looking for, an archway was cordoned off by a swag and an official-looking sign.  CLOSED FOR RENOVATION  PYX CHAMBER  ST. FAITH'S CHAPEL      CHAPTER    HOUSE The long, deserted corridor beyond the swag was littered with scaffolding and drop cloths. Immediately beyond the swag, Langdon could see the entrances to the Pyx Chamber and St. Faith's Chapel on the right and left. The entrance to the Chapter House, however, was much farther away, at the far end of the long hallway. Even from here, Langdon could see that the Chapter House's heavy wooden door was wide open, and the spacious octagonal interior was bathed in a grayish natural light from the Chapter House's enormous windows that looked out on College Garden. Go through the Chapter House, out south exit, to College Garden.  "We just left the east cloister," Langdon said, "so south exit must be through there and to the right."  Sophie was already stepping over the swag and moving forward.  As We hurried down the dark corridor, the sounds of the wind and rain from the east cloister faded behind We. the Chapter House was a kind of satellite structure - a freestanding annex at the end of the long hallway to ensure the privacy of the Parliament proceedings housed there.  "the Chapter House looks huge," Sophie whispered as We approached.  Langdon had forgotten just how large the Chapter House was. Even from outside The entrance to the Chapter House, Langdon could gaze across the vast expanse of floor to the breathtaking windows on the far side of the octagon, which rose five stories to a vaulted ceiling. We would certainly have a clear view of College Garden from in here.  Crossing the threshold, We Sophie found We having to squint. After the gloomy cloisters, the Chapter House felt like a solarium. We were a good ten feet into the Chapter House, searching the south wall, when We realized south exit We was not there.  We were standing in an enormous dead end. The creaking of a heavy door behind We made We turn, just as a heavy door closed with a resounding thud and the latch fell into place.  The lone man who had been standing behind a heavy door looked calm as The lone man who had been standing behind the door aimed a small revolver at We. The lone man who had been standing behind the door was portly and was propped on a pair of aluminum crutches.  For a moment Langdon thought Langdon must be dreaming.  It was Leigh Teabing.     CHAPTER    99  Sir Leigh Teabing felt rueful as Sir Leigh Teabing gazed out over the barrel of Sir Leigh Teabing's Medusa revolver at Robert Langdon and Sophie Neveu. "Robert Langdon and Sophie Neveu," Sir Leigh Teabing said, "since the moment Robert Langdon and Sophie Neveu walked into Sir Leigh Teabing's home last night, Sir Leigh Teabing have done everything in Sir Leigh Teabing's power to keep Robert Langdon and Sophie Neveu out of harm's way. But Robert Langdon and Sophie Neveu's persistence has now put Sir Leigh Teabing in a difficult position."  Sir Leigh Teabing could see the expressions of shock and betrayal on Sophie Neveu's Robert Langdon's faces, and yet Sir Leigh Teabing was confident that soon Robert Langdon and Sophie Neveu would both understand the chain of events that had guided Robert Langdon and Sophie Neveu to this unlikely crossroads.  There is so much Sir Leigh Teabing have to tell Robert Langdon and Sophie Neveu... so much Robert Langdon and Sophie Neveu do not yet understand.  "Please believe," Sir Leigh Teabing said, "Sir Leigh Teabing never had any intention of Robert Langdon and Sophie Neveu's being involved. Robert Langdon and Sophie Neveu came to my home. Robert Langdon and Sophie Neveu came searching for Sir Leigh Teabing. "  "Sir Leigh Teabing?" Robert Langdon finally managed. "What the hell are Sir Leigh Teabing doing? Robert Langdon and Sophie Neveu thought Sir Leigh Teabing were in trouble. Robert Langdon and Sophie Neveu came here to help Sir Leigh Teabing!"  "As Sir Leigh Teabing trusted Robert Langdon and Sophie Neveu would," Sir Leigh Teabing said. "We have much to discuss."  Robert Langdon Sophie Neveu seemed unable to tear Robert Langdon and Sophie Neveu's stunned gazes from his Medusa revolver.  "It is simply to ensure Robert Langdon and Sophie Neveu's full attention," Sir Leigh Teabing said. "If Sir Leigh Teabing had wanted to harm Robert Langdon and Sophie Neveu, Robert Langdon and Sophie Neveu would be dead by now. When Robert Langdon and Sophie Neveu walked into my home last nightlast night, Sir Leigh Teabing risked everything to spare Robert Langdon and Sophie Neveu's lives. Sir Leigh Teabing am a man of honor, and Sir Leigh Teabing vowed in Sir Leigh Teabing's deepest conscience only to sacrifice those who had betrayed the Sangreal."  "What are Sir Leigh Teabing talking about?" Robert Langdon said. "Betrayed the Sangreal?"  "Sir Leigh Teabing discovered a terrible truth," Sir Leigh Teabing said, sighing. "Sir Leigh Teabing learned why the the Sangreal documents were never revealed to the world. Sir Leigh Teabing learned that the Priory had decided not to release the truth after all. decided's why the millennium passed without any revelation, why nothing happened as we entered the End of Days."  Robert Langdon drew a breath, about to protest.  "the Priory," Sir Leigh Teabing continued, "was given a sacred charge to share the truth. To release the Sangreal documents when the End of Days arrived. For centuries, men like Da Vinci, Botticelli, and Newton risked everything to protect the Sangreal documents and carry out a sacred charge. And now, at the ultimate moment of truth, Jacques Sauniere changed Jacques Sauniere's mind. Jacques Sauniere eschewed Jacques Sauniere's duty. Jacques Sauniere decided the time was not right." Sir Leigh Teabing turned to Sophie Neveu. "Jacques Sauniere failed the Grail. Jacques Sauniere failed the Priory. And Jacques Sauniere failed the memory of all the generations that had worked to make the ultimate moment of truth possible."  "Sir Leigh Teabing?" Sophie Neveu declared, glancing up now, Sophie Neveu's green eyes boring into Sir Leigh Teabing with rage and realization. "Sir Leigh Teabing are the one responsible for Sophie Neveu's grandfather's murder?"  Sir Leigh Teabing scoffed. "my grandfather's and my grandfather's's senechaux were traitors to the Grail."  Sophie Neveu felt a fury rising from deep within. Sir Leigh Teabing's lying!  Sir Leigh Teabing's voice was relentless. "my grandfather's sold out to the Church. It is obvious the Church pressured my grandfather's to keep the truth quiet."  Sophie Neveu shook Sophie Neveu's head. "the Church had no influence on my grandfather's!"  Sir Leigh Teabing laughed coldly. "Sophie Neveu, the Church has two thousand years of experience pressuring those who threaten to unveil the Church's lies. Since the days of Constantine, the Church has successfully hidden the truth about Mary Magdalene and Jesus. We should not be surprised that now, once again, the Church have found a way to keep the world in the dark. the Church may no longer employ crusaders to slaughter non-believers, but the Church's influence is no less persuasive. No less insidious." Sir Leigh Teabing paused, as if to punctuate Sir Leigh Teabing's next point. "Sophie Neveu, for some time now my grandfather's has wanted to tell Sophie Neveu the truth about Sophie Neveu's family."  Sophie Neveu was stunned. "How could Sir Leigh Teabing know wanted?"  "Sir Leigh Teabing's methods are immaterial. The important thing for Sophie Neveu to grasp right now is this." Sir Leigh Teabing took a deep breath. "The deaths of Sophie Neveu's mother, father, grandmother, and brother were not accidental."  The words sent Sophie Neveu's emotions reeling. Sophie Neveu opened Sophie Neveu's mouth to speak but was unable.  Robert Langdon shook Robert Langdon's head. "What are Sir Leigh Teabing saying?" "Robert Langdon, it explains everything. All the pieces fit. History repeats History. the Church has a precedent of murder when it comes to silencing the Sangreal. With the End of Days imminent, killing the Grand Master's loved ones sent a very clear message. Be quiet, or Robert Langdon Sophie Neveu are next."  "It was a car accident," Sophie Neveu stammered, feeling the childhood pain welling inside Sophie Neveu. "An accident!"  "Bedtime stories to protect Sophie Neveu's innocence," Sir Leigh Teabing said. "Consider that only two family members went untouched - only two family members - the perfect pair to provide the Church with control over the brotherhood. Sir Leigh Teabing can only imagine the terror the Church wielded over my grandfather's these past years, threatening to kill Sophie Neveu if my grandfather's dared release the Sangreal secret, threatening to finish the job the Church started unless Jacques Sauniere influenced the Priory to reconsider the Priory's ancient vow."  "Sir Leigh Teabing," Robert Langdon argued, now visibly riled, "certainly Sir Leigh Teabing have no proof that the Church had anything to do with The deaths of your mother, father, grandmother, and brother, or that the Church influenced the Priory's decision to remain silent."  "Proof?" Sir Leigh Teabing fired back. "Sophie Neveu want proof the Priory was influenced? The new millennium has arrived, and yet the world remains ignorant! Is that not proof enough?"  In the echoes of Sir Leigh Teabing's words, Sophie Neveu heard another voice speaking. Sophie Neveu, I must tell Sophie Neveu the truth about your family. Sophie Neveu realized Sophie Neveu was trembling. Could the truth about your family possibly be that truth my grandfather's had wanted to tell Sophie Neveu? That your family had been murdered? What did Sophie Neveu truly know about It? Only sketchy details. Even the stories in the newspaper had been vague. An accident? Bedtime stories? Sophie Neveu flashed suddenly on my grandfather's's overprotectiveness, how my grandfather's never liked to leave Sophie Neveu alone when Sophie Neveu was young. Even when Sophie Neveu was grown and away at university, Sophie Neveu had the sense my grandfather's was watching over. Sophie Neveu wondered if there had been the Priory members in the shadows throughout Sophie Neveu's entire life, looking after Sophie Neveu.  "Sir Leigh Teabing suspected Jacques Sauniere was being manipulated," Robert Langdon said, glaring with disbelief at Sir Leigh Teabing. "So Sir Leigh Teabing murdered Jacques Sauniere?"  "Sir Leigh Teabing did not pull the trigger," Sir Leigh Teabing said. "Jacques Sauniere was dead years ago, when the Church stole your family from Jacques Sauniere. Jacques Sauniere was compromised. Now Jacques Sauniere is free of that pain, released from the shame caused by Jacques Sauniere's inability to carry out Jacques Sauniere's sacred duty. Consider the alternative. Something had to be done. Shall the world be ignorant forever? Shall the Church be allowed to cement its lies into our history books for all eternity? Shall the Church be permitted to influence indefinitely with murder and extortion? No, something needed to be done! And now Robert Langdon and Sophie Neveu are poised to carry out Jacques Sauniere's legacy and right a terrible wrong." Sir Leigh Teabing paused. "Robert Langdon and Sophie Neveu. Together."  Sophie Neveu felt only incredulity. "How could Sir Leigh Teabing possibly believe that Robert Langdon and Sophie Neveu would help Sir Leigh Teabing?" "Because, Sophie Neveu, Sophie Neveu are the reason the Priory failed to release the Sangreal documents. my grandfather's's love for Sophie Neveu prevented my grandfather's from challenging the Church. my grandfather's's fear of reprisal against your family crippled my grandfather's. my grandfather's never had a chance to explain the truth because Sophie Neveu rejected my grandfather's, tying my grandfather's's hands, making my grandfather's wait. Now Sophie Neveu owe the world the truth about your family. Sophie Neveu owe the truth about your family to the memory of my grandfather's." Robert Langdon had given up trying to get Robert Langdon's bearings. Despite the torrent of questions running through Robert Langdon's mind, Robert Langdon knew only one thing mattered now - getting Sophie Neveu out of here alive. All the guilt Robert Langdon had mistakenly felt earlier for involving Sir Leigh Teabing had now been transferred to Sophie Neveu.  Sir Leigh Teabing took Sophie Neveu to Chateau Villette. Sir Leigh Teabing am responsible.  Robert Langdon could not fathom that Sir Leigh Teabing would be capable of killing your family in cold blood here in the Chapter House, and yet Sir Leigh Teabing certainly had been involved in killing others during Sir Leigh Teabing's misguided quest. Robert Langdon had the uneasy feeling that gunshots in the Chapter House would go unheard, especially in this rain. And Sir Leigh Teabing just admitted Sir Leigh Teabing's guilt to Robert Langdon and Sophie Neveu.  Robert Langdon glanced at Sophie Neveu. the Church murdered your family to silence the Priory? Robert Langdon felt certain the modern Church did not murder people. There had to be some other explanation.  "Let Sophie Neveu leave," Robert Langdon declared, staring at Sir Leigh Teabing. "Sir Leigh Teabing and Robert Langdon should discuss this alone."  Sir Leigh Teabing gave an unnatural laugh. "Sir Leigh Teabing'm afraid that is one show of faith Sir Leigh Teabing cannot afford. Sir Leigh Teabing can, however, offer Robert Langdon this. " Sir Leigh Teabing propped Sir Leigh Teabing fully on Sir Leigh Teabing's crutches, gracelessly keeping his Medusa revolver aimed at Sophie Neveu, and removed this from Sir Leigh Teabing's pocket. Sir Leigh Teabing swayed a bit as Sir Leigh Teabing held this out for Robert Langdon. "A token of trust, Robert Langdon."  Robert Langdon felt wary and didn't move. Sir Leigh Teabing is giving this back to Robert Langdon and Sophie Neveu?  "Take this," Sir Leigh Teabing said, thrusting this awkwardly toward Robert Langdon.  Robert Langdon could imagine only one reason Sir Leigh Teabing would give this back. "Sir Leigh Teabing opened this already. Sir Leigh Teabing removed the map."  Sir Leigh Teabing was shaking Sir Leigh Teabing's head. "Robert Langdon, if Sir Leigh Teabing had solved this, Sir Leigh Teabing would have disappeared to find the Grail Sir Leigh Teabing and kept Sophie Neveu uninvolved. No, Sir Leigh Teabing do not know the answer. And Sir Leigh Teabing can admit know freely. A true knight learns humility in the face of the Grail. A true knight learns to obey the signs placed before A true knight. When Sir Leigh Teabing saw Sophie Neveu enter the Priory, Sir Leigh Teabing understood. Sophie Neveu were here for a reason. To help. Sir Leigh Teabing am not looking for singular glory here. Sir Leigh Teabing serve a far greater master than Sir Leigh Teabing's own pride. The Truth. Mankind deserves to know The Truth.. the Grail found us all, and now the Grail is begging to be revealed. Robert Langdon and Sophie Neveu must work together."  Despite Sir Leigh Teabing's pleas for cooperation and trust, his Medusa revolver remained trained on Sophie Neveu as Robert Langdon stepped forward and accepted this. The vinegar inside gurgled as Robert Langdon grasped this and stepped backward. The dials were still in random order, and the cryptex remained locked.  Robert Langdon eyed Sir Leigh Teabing. "How do Sir Leigh Teabing know Robert Langdon won't smash this right now?"  Sir Leigh Teabing's laugh was an eerie chortle. "Sir Leigh Teabing should have realized Sophie Neveu's threat to break this in the Temple Church was an empty one. Robert Langdon would never break this. Robert Langdon are an historian, Robert Langdon. Robert Langdon are holding the key to two thousand years of history - the lost key to the Sangreal. Robert Langdon can feel the souls of all the knights burned at the stake to protect the Sangreal's secret. Would Robert Langdon have all the knights burned at the stake to protect her secret die in vain? No, Robert Langdon will vindicate all the knights burned at the stake to protect her secret. Robert Langdon will join the ranks of the great men Robert Langdon admire - Da Vinci, Botticelli, Newton - each of whom would have been honored to be in Robert Langdon's shoes right now. The contents of this are crying out to Robert Langdon and Sophie Neveu. Longing to be set free. The time has come. Destiny has led Robert Langdon and Sophie Neveu to this moment."  "Sir Leigh Teabing cannot help Robert Langdon, Robert Langdon. Sir Leigh Teabing have no idea how to open this. Sir Leigh Teabing only saw Newton's tomb for a moment. And even if Sir Leigh Teabing knew the password..." Robert Langdon paused, realizing Robert Langdon had said too much.  "Sir Leigh Teabing would not tell Robert Langdon?" Sir Leigh Teabing sighed. "Sir Leigh Teabing am disappointed and surprised, Robert Langdon, that Sophie Neveu do not appreciate the extent to which Sophie Neveu are in Sir Leigh Teabing's debt. Sir Leigh Teabing's task would have been far simpler had Remy and Sir Leigh Teabing eliminated only two family members when Sophie Neveu walked into Chateau Villette. Instead Sir Leigh Teabing risked everything to take the nobler course."  "the nobler course is noble?" Robert Langdon demanded, eyeing his Medusa revolver.  "Jacques Sauniere's fault," Sir Leigh Teabing said. "Jacques Sauniere and his senechaux lied to Silas. Otherwise, Sir Leigh Teabing would have obtained this without complication. How was Sir Leigh Teabing to imagine the Grand Master's would go to such ends to deceive Sir Leigh Teabing and bequeath this to Sophie Neveu?" Sir Leigh Teabing looked at Sophie Neveu with disdain. "Someone so unqualified to hold this knowledge that Sophie Neveu required a symbologist baby-sitter." Sir Leigh Teabing glanced back at Robert Langdon. "Fortunately, Robert Langdon, Sophie Neveu's involvement turned out to be Sir Leigh Teabing's saving grace. Rather than this remaining locked in the depository bank forever, Sophie Neveu extracted this and walked into my home."  Where else would Robert Langdon run? Robert Langdon thought. The community of Grail historians is small, and You and I have a history together.  Sir Leigh Teabing now looked smug. "When Sir Leigh Teabing learned Jacques Sauniere left Sophie Neveu a dying message, Sir Leigh Teabing had a pretty good idea Sophie Neveu were holding valuable Priory information. Whether valuable Priory information was thisthis, or information on where to find this, Sir Leigh Teabing was not sure. But with the police on Sophie Neveu's heels, Sir Leigh Teabing had a sneaking suspicion Sophie Neveu might arrive on Sir Leigh Teabing's doorstep."  Robert Langdon glared. "And if we had not?"  "Sir Leigh Teabing was formulating a plan to extend Sophie Neveu a helping hand. One way or another, this was coming to Chateau Villette. The fact that Sophie Neveu delivered this into Sir Leigh Teabing's waiting hands only serves as proof that Sir Leigh Teabing's cause is just."  "What!" Robert Langdon was appalled.  "Silas was supposed to break in and steal this from Sophie Neveu in Chateau Villette - thus removing Sophie Neveu from the equation without hurting Sophie Neveu, and exonerating Sir Leigh Teabing from any suspicion of complicity. However, when Sir Leigh Teabing saw the intricacy of Jacques Sauniere's codes, Sir Leigh Teabing decided to include Robert Langdon and Sophie Neveu in Sir Leigh Teabing's quest a bit longer. Sir Leigh Teabing could have Silas steal this later, once Sir Leigh Teabing knew enough to carry on alone."  "the Temple Church," Sophie Neveu said, Sophie Neveu's tone awash with betrayal. Light begins to dawn, Sir Leigh Teabing thought. the Temple Church was the perfect location to steal this from Robert Langdon and Sophie NeveuSophie Neveu, and the Temple Church's apparent relevance to the poem made the Temple Church a plausible decoy. Sir Leigh Teabing's orders had been clear - stay out of sight while Silas recovers this. Unfortunately, Robert Langdon's threat to smash this on the chapel floor had caused Sir Leigh Teabing to panic. If only Sir Leigh Teabing had not revealed Sir Leigh Teabing, Sir Leigh Teabing thought ruefully, recalling Sir Leigh Teabing's own mock kidnapping. Sir Leigh Teabing was the sole link to Sir Leigh Teabing, and Sir Leigh Teabing showed Sir Leigh Teabing's face!  Fortunately, Silas remained unaware of Sir Leigh Teabing's true identity and was easily fooled into taking Sir Leigh Teabing from the Temple Church and then watching naively as Sir Leigh Teabing pretended to tie Sir Leigh Teabing in the back of the limousine. With the soundproof divider raised, Sir Leigh Teabing was able to phone Silas in the front seat, use the fake French accent of the Teacher, and direct Silas to go straight to Opus Dei. A simple anonymous tip to the police was all it would take to remove Silas from the picture.  One loose end tied up.  The other loose end was harder. Sir Leigh Teabing  Teabing struggled deeply with the decision, but in the end Sir Leigh Teabing had proven Sir Leigh Teabing a liability. Every Grail quest requires sacrifice. The cleanest solution had been staring Sir Leigh Teabing in the face from the limousine's wet bar - a flask, some cognac, and a can of peanuts. The powder at the bottom of a can of peanuts would be more than enough to trigger Sir Leigh Teabing's deadly allergy. When Sir Leigh Teabing parked the limousine on Horse Guards Parade, Sir Leigh Teabing climbed out of the back, walked to the side passenger door, and sat in the front next to Sir Leigh Teabing. Minutes later, Sir Leigh Teabing got out of the limousine, climbed into the rear again, cleaned up the evidence, and finally emerged to carry out the final phase of Sir Leigh Teabing's mission.  Westminster Abbey had been a short walk, and although Sir Leigh Teabing's leg braces, crutches, and gun had set off the metal detector, the rent-a-cops never knew what to do. Do the rent-a-cops ask Sir Leigh Teabing to remove Sir Leigh Teabing's braces and crawl through? Do the rent-a-cops frisk Sir Leigh Teabing's deformed body? Sir Leigh Teabing presented the rent-a-cops a far easier solution - an embossed card identifying Sir Leigh Teabing as Knight of the Realm. the rent-a-cops practically tripped over one another ushering Sir Leigh Teabing in.  Now, eyeing Robert Langdon and Sophie NeveuRobert Langdon Sophie Neveu, Sir Leigh Teabing resisted the urge to reveal how Sir Leigh Teabing had brilliantly implicated Opus Dei in the plot that would soon bring about the demise of the modern Church. reveal would have to wait. Right now there was work to do.  "Robert Langdon and Sophie Neveu, " Sir Leigh Teabing declared in flawless French, "vous ne trouvezpas le Saint-Graal, c'est le Saint-Graal. " Sir Leigh Teabing smiled. "Robert Langdon and Sophie Neveu's paths together could not be more clear. the Grail has found Robert Langdon and Sophie Neveu."  Silence.  Sir Leigh Teabing spoke to Robert Langdon and Sophie Neveu in a whisper now. "Listen. Can Robert Langdon and Sophie Neveu hear it? the Grail is speaking to Robert Langdon and Sophie Neveu across the centuries. the Grail is begging to be saved from the Priory's folly. Sir Leigh Teabing implore Robert Langdon and Sophie Neveu to recognize this opportunity. There could not possibly be three more capable people assembled at this moment to break the final code and open the cryptex." Sir Leigh Teabing paused, Sir Leigh Teabing's eyes alight. "Robert Langdon and Sophie Neveu need to swear an oath together. A pledge of faith to one another. A knight's allegiance to uncover the truth and make the truth known."  Sophie Neveu stared deep into Sir Leigh Teabing's eyes and spoke in a steely tone. "Sophie Neveu will never swear an oath with my grandfather's's . Except an oath that Sophie Neveu will see Sir Leigh Teabing go to prison."  Sir Leigh Teabing's heart turned grave, then resolute. "Sir Leigh Teabing am sorry Sophie Neveu feel that way, Sophie Neveu." Sir Leigh Teabing turned and aimed his Medusa revolver at Robert Langdon. "And Robert Langdon, Robert Langdon? Are Robert Langdon with Sir Leigh Teabing, or against Sir Leigh Teabing?"     CHAPTER    100  Bishop Manuel Aringarosa's body had endured many kinds of pain, and yet the searing heat of the bullet wound in Bishop Manuel Aringarosa's's chest felt profoundly foreign to Bishop Manuel Aringarosa's. Deep and grave. Not a wound of the flesh... but closer to the soul.  Bishop Manuel Aringarosa's opened Bishop Manuel Aringarosa's's eyes, trying to see, but the rain on Bishop Manuel Aringarosa's's face blurred Bishop Manuel Aringarosa's's vision. Where am Bishop Manuel Aringarosa's? Bishop Manuel Aringarosa's could feel powerful arms holding Bishop Manuel Aringarosa's, carrying Bishop Manuel Aringarosa's's limp body like a rag doll, Bishop Manuel Aringarosa's's black cassock flapping. Lifting a weary arm, Bishop Manuel Aringarosa's mopped Bishop Manuel Aringarosa's's eyes and saw the man holding Bishop Manuel Aringarosa's was Silas. Silas was struggling down a misty sidewalk, shouting for a hospital, Silas's voice a heartrending wail of agony. Silas's red eyes were focused dead ahead, tears streaming down Silas's pale, blood- spattered face.  "Silas," Bishop Manuel Aringarosa's whispered, "Silas're hurt."  Silas glanced down, Silas's visage contorted in anguish. "Silas am so very sorry, Bishop Manuel Aringarosa's." Silas seemed almost too pained to speak.  "No, Silas," Bishop Manuel Aringarosa's replied. "It is Bishop Manuel Aringarosa's who am sorry. This is Bishop Manuel Aringarosa's's fault." The Teacher promised Bishop Manuel Aringarosa's there would be no killing, and Bishop Manuel Aringarosa's told Silas to obey The Teacher fully. "Bishop Manuel Aringarosa's was too eager. Too fearful. You and I were deceived." The Teacher was never going to deliver You and I the Holy Grail.  Cradled in the arms of Silas, Bishop Manuel Aringarosa's felt Bishop Manuel Aringarosa's reel back in time. To Spain. To Bishop Manuel Aringarosa's's modest beginnings, building a small Catholic church in Oviedo with Silas. And later, to New York City, where Bishop Manuel Aringarosa's had proclaimed the glory of God with the towering Opus Dei Center on Lexington Avenue.  Five months ago, Bishop Manuel Aringarosa's had received devastating news. Bishop Manuel Aringarosa's's life's work was in jeopardy. Bishop Manuel Aringarosa's recalled, with vivid detail, the meeting inside Castel Gandolfo that had changed Bishop Manuel Aringarosa's's life... devastating newsThis .  Bishop Manuel Aringarosa's had entered Castel Gandolfo's Astronomy Library with Bishop Manuel Aringarosa's's head held high, fully expecting to be lauded by throngs of welcoming hands, all eager to pat Bishop Manuel Aringarosa's on the back for Bishop Manuel Aringarosa's's superior work representing Catholicism in America.  But only three people were present.  The Vatican secretariat. Obese. Dour.  Two high-ranking Italian cardinals. Sanctimonious. Smug.  "Secretariat?" Bishop Manuel Aringarosa's said, puzzled.  secretariat. shook Bishop Manuel Aringarosa's's hand and motioned to the chair opposite secretariat.. "Please, make Bishop Manuel Aringarosa's comfortable."  Bishop Manuel Aringarosa's sat, sensing something was wrong.  "secretariat. am not skilled in small talk, Bishop Manuel Aringarosa's," secretariat. said, "so let secretariat. be direct about the reason for Bishop Manuel Aringarosa's's visit."  "Please. Speak openly." Bishop Manuel Aringarosa's glanced at Two high-ranking Italian cardinals.  "As Bishop Manuel Aringarosa's are well aware," secretariat. said, "His Holiness and others in Rome have been concerned lately with the political fallout from Opus Dei's more controversial practices."  Bishop Manuel Aringarosa's felt Bishop Manuel Aringarosa's bristle instantly. Bishop Manuel Aringarosa's already had been through this on numerous occasions with The Vatican.  "secretariat. want to assure Bishop Manuel Aringarosa's," secretariat. added quickly, "that His Holiness does not seek to change anything about the way Bishop Manuel Aringarosa's run Bishop Manuel Aringarosa's's ministry. "  / should hope not! "Then why am Bishop Manuel Aringarosa's here?"  secretariat. sighed. "Bishop Manuel Aringarosa's, secretariat. am not sure how to say this delicately, so secretariat. will state this directly. Two days ago, the Secretariat Council voted unanimously to revoke The Vatican's sanction of Opus Dei."  Bishop Manuel Aringarosa's was certain Bishop Manuel Aringarosa's had heard incorrectly. "Bishop Manuel Aringarosa's beg secretariat.'s pardon?"  "Plainly stated, six months from today, Opus Dei will no longer be considered a prelature of The Vatican. Bishop Manuel Aringarosa's will be a church unto Bishop Manuel Aringarosa's. The Holy See will be disassociating The Holy See from Bishop Manuel Aringarosa's. His Holiness agrees and we are already drawing up the legal papers."  "But... disassociating is impossible!"  "On the contrary, disassociating is quite possible. And necessary. His Holiness has become uneasy with Bishop Manuel Aringarosa's's aggressive recruiting policies and Bishop Manuel Aringarosa's's practices of corporal mortification." secretariat. paused. "Also Bishop Manuel Aringarosa's's policies regarding women. Quite frankly, Opus Dei has become a liability and an embarrassment."  Bishop Manuel Aringarosa's was stupefied. "An embarrassment?"  "Certainly Bishop Manuel Aringarosa's cannot be surprised it has come to this."  "Opus Dei is the only Catholic organization whose numbers are growing! Bishop Manuel Aringarosa's now have over eleven hundred priests ! "  "True. A troubling issue for us all."  Bishop Manuel Aringarosa's shot to Bishop Manuel Aringarosa's's feet. "Ask His Holiness if Opus Dei was an embarrassment in 1982 when Opus Dei helped the The Vatican Bank!"  "The Vatican will always be grateful for helped," secretariat. said, secretariat.'s tone appeasing, "and yet there are those who still believe Bishop Manuel Aringarosa's's financial munificence in 1982 is the only reason Bishop Manuel Aringarosa's were granted prelature status in the first place."  "is is not true!" The insinuation offended Bishop Manuel Aringarosa's deeply.  "Whatever the case, Opus Dei plan to act in good faith. Opus Dei are drawing up severance terms that will include a reimbursement of those monies. a reimbursement of those monies will be paid in five installments."  "You are buying Bishop Manuel Aringarosa's off?" Bishop Manuel Aringarosa's demanded. "Paying Bishop Manuel Aringarosa's to go quietly? When Opus Dei is the only remaining voice of reason!"  One of the cardinals glanced up. "One of the cardinals'm sorry, did Bishop Manuel Aringarosa's say reason?"  Bishop Manuel Aringarosa's leaned across the table, sharpening Bishop Manuel Aringarosa's's tone to a point. "Do One of the cardinals really wonder why Catholics are leaving the Church? Look around One of the cardinals, One of the cardinals. People have lost respect. The rigors of faith are gone. The doctrine has become a buffet line. Abstinence, confession, communion, baptism, mass - take your pick - choose whatever combination pleases you and ignore the rest. What kind of spiritual guidance is the Church offering?"  "Third-century laws," One of the cardinals said, "cannot be applied to the modern followers of Christ. Third-century laws are not workable in today's society."  "Well, Third-century laws seem to be working for Opus Dei!"  "Bishop Manuel Aringarosa's," secretariat. said, secretariat.'s voice conclusive. "Out of respect for Opus Dei's relationship with the previous Pope, His Holiness will be giving Opus Dei six months to voluntarily break away from The Vatican. secretariat. suggest Bishop Manuel Aringarosa's cite Bishop Manuel Aringarosa's's differences of opinion with The Holy See and establish Bishop Manuel Aringarosa's as Bishop Manuel Aringarosa's's own Christian organization."  "Bishop Manuel Aringarosa's refuse!" Bishop Manuel Aringarosa's declared. "And Bishop Manuel Aringarosa's'll tell His Holiness that in person!"  "secretariat.'m afraid His Holiness no longer cares to meet with Bishop Manuel Aringarosa's."  Bishop Manuel Aringarosa's stood up. "His Holiness would not dare abolish his black cassock!"  "secretariat.'m sorry." secretariat.'s eyes did not flinch. "God giveth and God taketh away."  Bishop Manuel Aringarosa's had staggered from the meeting inside Castel Gandolfo that had changed his life in bewilderment and panic. Returning to New York City, where he had proclaimed the glory of God with the towering Opus Dei Center on Lexington Avenue, Bishop Manuel Aringarosa's stared out at the skyline in disillusionment for days, overwhelmed with sadness for the future of Christ.  It was several weeks later that Bishop Manuel Aringarosa's received the phone call that changed all that. The caller sounded French and identified The caller as the Teacher - a title common in his black cassock. The caller said The caller knew of The Vatican's plans to pull support from Opus Dei.  How could The caller know knew? Bishop Manuel Aringarosa's wondered. Bishop Manuel Aringarosa's had hoped only a handful of The Vatican power brokers knew of Opus Dei's impending annulment. Apparently the word was out. When it came to containing gossip, no walls in the world were as porous as those surrounding Vatican City.  "The caller have ears everywhere, Bishop Manuel Aringarosa's," The caller whispered, "and with ears everywhere The caller have gained certain knowledge. With Bishop Manuel Aringarosa's's help, The caller can uncover the hiding place of a sacred relic that will bring Bishop Manuel Aringarosa's enormous power... enough power to make The Vatican bow before Bishop Manuel Aringarosa's. Enough power to save the Faith." The caller paused. "Not just for Opus Dei. But for all of us."  God taketh away... and God giveth. Bishop Manuel Aringarosa's felt a glorious ray of hope. "Tell Bishop Manuel Aringarosa's The caller's plan." Bishop Manuel Aringarosa's was unconscious when the doors of St. Mary's Hospital hissed open. Silas lurched into the entryway delirious with exhaustion. Dropping to Silas's knees on the tile floor, Silas cried out for help. Everyone in the reception area gaped in wonderment at the half-naked albino offering forth Bishop Manuel Aringarosa's.  The doctor who helped Silas heave Bishop Manuel Aringarosa's onto a gurney looked gloomy as The doctor who helped Silas heave the delirious bishop onto a gurney felt Bishop Manuel Aringarosa's's pulse. "Bishop Manuel Aringarosa's's lost a lot of blood. The doctor who helped Silas heave the delirious bishop onto a gurney am not hopeful."  Bishop Manuel Aringarosa's's eyes flickered, and The doctor who helped Silas heave the delirious bishop onto a gurney returned for a moment, The doctor who helped Silas heave the delirious bishop onto a gurney's gaze locating Silas. "The doctor who helped Silas heave the delirious bishop onto a gurney's ..."  Silas's soul thundered with remorse and rage. "The doctor who helped Silas heave the delirious bishop onto a gurney, if it takes Silas's lifetime, Silas will find Opus Dei, and Silas will kill Opus Dei."  Bishop Manuel Aringarosa's shook Bishop Manuel Aringarosa's's head, looking sad as they prepared to wheel Bishop Manuel Aringarosa's away. "Silas... if Silas have learned nothing from Bishop Manuel Aringarosa's, please... learn this." Bishop Manuel Aringarosa's took Silas's hand and gave Silas's hand a firm squeeze. "Forgiveness is God's greatest gift."  "But The doctor who helped Silas heave the delirious bishop onto a gurney..."  Bishop Manuel Aringarosa's closed Bishop Manuel Aringarosa's's eyes. "Silas, Silas must pray."     CHAPTER    101  Robert Langdon stood beneath the lofty cupola of the deserted Chapter House and stared into the barrel of Leigh Teabing's gun.  Robert Langdon, are Robert Langdon with Leigh Teabing's, or against Leigh Teabing's? Leigh Teabing's's words echoed in the silence of Robert Langdon's mind.  There was no viable response, Robert Langdon knew. Answer yes, and Robert Langdon would be selling out Sophie. Answer no, and Leigh Teabing's would have no choice but to kill them both.  Robert Langdon's years in the classroom had not imbued Robert Langdon with any skills relevant to handling confrontations at gunpoint, but the classroom had taught Robert Langdon something about answering paradoxical questions. When a question has no correct answer, there is only one honest response.  The gray area between yes and no.  Silence.  Staring at the cryptex in Robert Langdon's hands, Robert Langdon chose simply to walk away.  Without ever lifting Robert Langdon's eyes, Robert Langdon stepped backward, out into the deserted Chapter House's vast empty spaces. Neutral ground. Robert Langdon hoped Robert Langdon's focus on the cryptex in his hands signaled Leigh Teabing's that collaboration might be an option, and that Robert Langdon's silence signaled Sophie Robert Langdon had not abandoned Sophie.  All the while buying time to think.  The act of thinking, Robert Langdon suspected, was exactly what Leigh Teabing's wanted Robert Langdon to do. That's why Leigh Teabing's handed Robert Langdon the cryptex in his hands. So Robert Langdon could feel the weight of Robert Langdon's decision. Leigh Teabing's hoped the touch of the cryptex in his hands would make Robert Langdon fully grasp the magnitude of the cryptex in his hands's contents, coaxing Robert Langdon's academic curiosity to overwhelm all else, forcing Robert Langdon to realize that failure to unlock the keystone would mean the loss of history history itself.  With Sophie at gunpoint across the room, Robert Langdon feared that discovering the cryptex in his hands's elusive password would be Robert Langdon's only remaining hope of bartering Sophie's release. If Robert Langdon can free the map, Leigh Teabing's will negotiate. Forcing Robert Langdon's mind to this critical task, Robert Langdon moved slowly toward the far windows... allowing Robert Langdon's mind to fill with the numerous astronomical images on Newton's tomb.  Robert Langdon seek the orb that ought be on Newton's tomb. the orb that ought be on his tomb speaks of Rosy flesh and seeded womb. Turning Robert Langdon's back to the others, Robert Langdon walked toward the far windows, searching for any inspiration in the far windows's stained-glass mosaics. There was none.  Place Robert Langdon in Sauniere's mind, Robert Langdon urged, gazing outward now into College Garden. What would Sauniere's believe is the orb that ought be on his tomb? Images of stars, comets, and planets twinkled in the falling rain, but Robert Langdon ignored Images of stars, comets, and planets. Sauniere's was not a man of science. Sauniere's was a man of humanity, of art, of history. The sacred feminine... the chalice... the Rose... the banished Mary Magdalene... the decline of the goddess... the Holy Grail.  Legend had always portrayed the Holy Grail. as a cruel mistress, dancing in the shadows just out of sight, whispering in your ear, luring you one more step and then evaporating into the mist.  Gazing out at the rustling trees of College Garden, Robert Langdon sensed the Holy Grail.'s playful presence. The signs were everywhere. Like a taunting silhouette emerging from the fog, the branches of Britain's oldest apple tree burgeoned with five-petaled blossoms, all glistening like Venus. the Holy Grail. was in College Garden now. the Holy Grail. was dancing in the rain, singing songs of the ages, peeking out from behind the branches of Britain's oldest apple tree as if to remind Robert Langdon that the fruit of knowledge was growing just beyond Robert Langdon's reach. Across the room, Leigh Teabing's watched with confidence as Robert Langdon gazed out the window as if under a spell.  Exactly as Leigh Teabing's hoped, Leigh Teabing's thought. Robert Langdon will come around.  For some time now, Leigh Teabing's had suspected Robert Langdon might hold the key to the Holy Grail.. It was no coincidence that Leigh Teabing's launched Leigh Teabing's's plan into action on the same night Robert Langdon was scheduled to meet Sauniere's. Listening in on Sauniere's, Leigh Teabing's was certain Sauniere's's eagerness to meet privately with Robert Langdon could mean only one thing. the map has touched a nerve with the Priory.  Robert Langdon has stumbled onto a truth, and Sauniere's fears a truth's release. Leigh Teabing's felt certain Sauniere's was summoning Robert Langdon to silence Robert Langdon.  a truth has been silenced long enough!  Leigh Teabing's knew Leigh Teabing's had to act quickly. Silas's attack would accomplish two goals. Silas's attack would prevent Sauniere's from persuading Robert Langdon to keep quiet, and Silas's attack would ensure that once the keystone was in Leigh Teabing's's hands, Robert Langdon would be in Paris for recruitment should Leigh Teabing's need Leigh Teabing's.  Arranging the fatal meeting between Sauniere's and Silas's had been almost too easy. Silas's had inside information about Sauniere's's deepest fears. Yesterday afternoon, Silas's had phoned Sauniere's and posed as a distraught priest. "Sauniere's, forgive Silas's, Silas's must speak to Sauniere's at once. Silas's should never breach the sanctity of the confessional, but in this case, Silas's feel Silas's must. Silas's just took confession from a man who claimed to have murdered members of Sauniere's's family. " Sauniere's's response was startled but wary. "your family died in an accident. The police report was conclusive."  "Yes, a car accident," Silas's said, baiting the hook. "a man who claimed to have murdered members of your family said a man who claimed to have murdered members of your family forced members of your family's car off the road into a river. "  Sauniere's fell silent.  "Sauniere's, Silas's would never have phoned Sauniere's directly except a man who claimed to have murdered members of your family made a comment which makes Silas's now fear for Sauniere's's safety." Silas's paused. "a man who claimed to have murdered members of your family also mentioned Sauniere's's ."  The mention of Sophie's name had been the catalyst. Sauniere's leapt into action. Sauniere's ordered Silas's to come see Sauniere's immediately in the safest location Sauniere's knew - Sauniere's's Louvre office. Then Sauniere's phoned Sophie to warn Sophie Sophie might be in danger. Drinks with Robert Langdon were instantly abandoned.  Now, with Robert Langdon separated from Sophie on the far side of the room, Leigh Teabing's sensed Leigh Teabing's had successfully alienated Sauniere and Silas from one another. Sophie remained defiant, but Robert Langdon clearly saw the larger picture. Robert Langdon was trying to figure out the password. Robert Langdon understands the importance of finding the Holy Grail. and releasing Sophie from bondage.  "Robert Langdon won't open the Holy Grail. for Sophie," Sophie said coldly. "Even if Robert Langdon can."  Leigh Teabing's was glancing at Robert Langdon as Leigh Teabing's held Leigh Teabing's gun on Sophie. Leigh Teabing's was fairly certain now Leigh Teabing's was going to have to use Leigh Teabing's gun. Although use troubled Leigh Teabing's, Leigh Teabing's knew Leigh Teabing's would not hesitate if it came to use. / have given Sophie every opportunity to do the right thing. the Holy Grail. is bigger than any one of us.  At that moment, Robert Langdon turned from the far windows. "Newton's tomb..." Robert Langdon said suddenly, facing Sauniere and Silas with a faint glimmer of hope in Robert Langdon's eyes. "Leigh Teabing's know where to look on Newton's tomb. Yes, Leigh Teabing's think Leigh Teabing's can find the password!"  Leigh Teabing's's heart soared. "Where, Robert Langdon? Tell Sophie!"  Sophie sounded horrified. "Robert Langdon, no! Robert Langdon're not going to help Robert Langdon, are Robert Langdon?"  Robert Langdon approached with a resolute stride, holding the cryptex in his hands before Robert Langdon. "No," Robert Langdon said, Robert Langdon's eyes hardening as Robert Langdon turned to Robert Langdon. "Not until Robert Langdon lets Robert Langdon go."  Leigh Teabing's's optimism darkened. "We are so close, Robert Langdon. Don't Robert Langdon dare start playing games with Leigh Teabing's!" "No games," Robert Langdon said. "Let Sophie go. Then Robert Langdon'll take Robert Langdon to Newton's tomb. We'll open the cryptex in his hands together."  "Sophie'm not going anywhere," Sophie declared, Sophie's eyes narrowing with rage. "the cryptex in his hands was given to Sophie by Sophie's grandfather. the cryptex in his hands is not Robert Langdon's to open."  Robert Langdon wheeled, looking fearful. "Sophie, please! Sophie're in danger. Leigh Teabing's'm trying to help Sophie!"  "How? By unveiling the secret my grandfather died trying to protect? my grandfather trusted Robert Langdon, Robert Langdon. / trusted Robert Langdon!"  Robert Langdon's blue eyes showed panic now, and Leigh Teabing's could not help but smile to see Sauniere and Silas working against one another. Robert Langdon's attempts to be gallant were more pathetic than anything. On the verge of unveiling one of history's greatest secrets, and Robert Langdon troubles Robert Langdon with Sophie.  "Sophie," Robert Langdon pleaded. "Please... Sophie must leave."  Sophie shook Sophie's head. "Not unless Robert Langdon either hand Sophie the cryptex in his hands or smash the cryptex in his hands on the floor."  "What?" Robert Langdon gasped.  "Robert Langdon, my grandfather would prefer the secret my grandfather died trying to protect lost forever than see the secret my grandfather died trying to protect in the hands of my grandfather's murderer." Sophie's eyes looked as if Sophie's eyes would well with tears, but Sophie's eyes did not. Sophie stared directly back at Leigh Teabing's. "Shoot Sophie if Leigh Teabing's have to. Sophie am not leaving my grandfather's legacy in Leigh Teabing's's hands."  Very well. Leigh Teabing's aimed Leigh Teabing's gun.  "No!" Robert Langdon shouted, raising Robert Langdon's arm and suspending the cryptex in his hands precariously over the hard stone floor. "Robert Langdon, if Robert Langdon even think about it, Robert Langdon will drop the cryptex in his hands."  Leigh Teabing's laughed. "That bluff worked on Remy. Not on Leigh Teabing's. Leigh Teabing's know Robert Langdon better than that."  "Do Robert Langdon, Robert Langdon?"  Yes Robert Langdon do. Robert Langdon's poker face needs work, Leigh Teabing's's . It took Leigh Teabing's several seconds, but Leigh Teabing's can see now that Robert Langdon are lying. Robert Langdon have no idea where on Newton's tomb the answer lies. "Truly, Robert Langdon? Robert Langdon know where on Newton's tomb to look?" "Ida"  The falter in Robert Langdon's eyes was fleeting but Robert Langdon caught The falter in Langdon's eyes. There was a lie there. A desperate, pathetic ploy to save Sophie. Leigh Teabing's felt a profound disappointment in Robert Langdon.  / am a lone knight, surrounded by unworthy souls. And Leigh Teabing's will have to decipher the keystone on Leigh Teabing's's own.  Robert Langdon and Sophie were nothing but a threat to Leigh Teabing's now... and to the Holy Grail.. As painful as the solution was going to be, Leigh Teabing's knew Leigh Teabing's could carry the solution out with a clean conscience. The only challenge would be to persuade Robert Langdon to set down the keystone so Leigh Teabing's could safely end this charade.  "A show of faith," Leigh Teabing's said, lowering Leigh Teabing's gun from Sophie. "Set down the keystone, and we'll talk." Robert Langdon knew a lie had failed.  Robert Langdon could see the dark resolve in Leigh Teabing's's face and knew the moment was upon them. When Robert Langdon set the keystone down, Leigh Teabing's will kill them both. Even without looking at Sophie, Robert Langdon could hear Sophie's heart beseeching Robert Langdon in silent desperation. Robert Langdon, Robert Langdon is not worthy of the Holy Grail.. Please do not place the Holy Grail. in Teabing's hands. No matter what the cost.  Robert Langdon had already made Robert Langdon's decision several minutes ago, while standing alone at the window overlooking College Garden.  Protect Sophie.  Protect the Holy Grail..  Robert Langdon had almost shouted out in desperation. But Robert Langdon cannot see how!  The stark moments of disillusionment had brought with The stark moments of disillusionment a clarity unlike any Robert Langdon had ever felt. The Truth is right before Robert Langdon's eyes, Robert Langdon. Robert Langdon knew not from where the epiphany came. the Holy Grail. is not mocking Robert Langdon, the Holy Grail. is calling out to a worthy soul.  Now, bowing down like a subject several yards in front of Leigh Teabing's, Robert Langdon lowered the cryptex in his hands to within inches of the stone floor.  "Yes, Robert Langdon," Leigh Teabing's whispered, aiming Leigh Teabing's gun at Robert Langdon. "Set the cryptex in his hands down."  Robert Langdon's eyes moved heavenward, up into the gaping void of the lofty cupola of the deserted Chapter House. Crouching lower, Robert Langdon lowered Robert Langdon's gaze to Leigh Teabing's gun.  "Robert Langdon'm sorry, Robert Langdon." In one fluid motion, Robert Langdon leapt up, swinging Robert Langdon's arm skyward, launching the cryptex in his hands straight up toward the dome above. Leigh Teabing's did not feel Leigh Teabing's's finger pull the trigger, but Leigh Teabing's gun discharged with a thundering crash. Robert Langdon's crouched form was now vertical, almost airborne, and the bullet exploded in the floor near Robert Langdon's feet. Half of Leigh Teabing's's brain attempted to adjust Leigh Teabing's's aim and fire again in rage, but the more powerful half dragged Leigh Teabing's's eyes upward into the lofty cupola of the deserted Chapter House.  the keystone  Time seemed to freeze, morphing into a slow-motion dream as Leigh Teabing's's entire world became the keystone. Leigh Teabing's watched the keystone rise to the apex of the keystone's climb... hovering for a moment in the gaping void of the Chapter House cupola... and then tumbling downward, end over end, back toward the stone floor.  All of Leigh Teabing's's hopes and dreams were plummeting toward earth. the keystone cannot strike the stone floor! Leigh Teabing's can reach the keystone! Leigh Teabing's's body reacted on instinct. Leigh Teabing's released Leigh Teabing's gun and heaved Leigh Teabing's forward, dropping Leigh Teabing's's crutches as Leigh Teabing's reached out with Leigh Teabing's's soft, manicured hands. Stretching Leigh Teabing's's arms and fingers, Leigh Teabing's snatched the keystone from midair.  Falling forward with the keystone victoriously clutched in Leigh Teabing's's hand, Leigh Teabing's knew Leigh Teabing's was falling too fast. With nothing to break Leigh Teabing's's fall, Leigh Teabing's's outstretched arms hit first, and the cryptex in his hands collided hard with the stone floor.  There was a sickening crunch of glass within.  For a full second, Leigh Teabing's did not breathe. Lying there outstretched on the stone floor, staring the length of his outstretched arms at Leigh Teabing's gunhis outstretched arms, Leigh Teabing's implored the glass vial inside to hold. Then the acrid tang of vinegar cut the air, and Leigh Teabing's felt the cool liquid flowing out through the dials onto Leigh Teabing's's palm.  Wild panic gripped Leigh Teabing's. NO! vinegar was streaming now, and Leigh Teabing's pictured the papyrus dissolving within. Robert Langdon, you fool! The secret is lost!  Leigh Teabing's felt Leigh Teabing's sobbing uncontrollably. the Holy Grail. is gone. Everything destroyed. Shuddering in disbelief over Robert Langdon's actions, Leigh Teabing's tried to force Leigh Teabing's gun apart, longing to catch a fleeting glimpse of history before The secret dissolved forever. To Leigh Teabing's's shock, as Leigh Teabing's pulled the ends of the keystone, Leigh Teabing's gun separated.  Leigh Teabing's gasped and peered inside. Leigh Teabing's gun was empty except for shards of wet glass. No dissolving papyrus. Leigh Teabing's rolled over and looked up at Robert Langdon. Sophie stood beside Leigh Teabing's, aiming Leigh Teabing's gun down at Leigh Teabing's. Bewildered, Leigh Teabing's looked back at the keystone and saw the keystone. the dials were no longer at random. the dials spelled a five-letter word: APPLE. "The orb from which Eve partook," Robert Langdon said coolly, "incurring the Holy wrath of God. Original sin. The symbol of the fall of the sacred feminine."  Leigh Teabing's felt the truth come crashing down on Leigh Teabing's in excruciating austerity. the orb that ought be on his tomb could be none other than the Rosy apple that fell from heaven, struck Newton's on the head, and inspired Newton's's life's work. Newton's's labor's fruit! The Rosy flesh with a seeded womb!  "Robert Langdon," Leigh Teabing's stammered, overwhelmed. "Robert Langdon opened the keystone. Where... is the map?"  Without blinking, Robert Langdon reached into the breast pocket of Robert Langdon's tweed coat and carefully extracted a delicate rolled papyrus. Only a few yards from where Leigh Teabing's lay, Robert Langdon unrolled a delicate rolled papyrus and looked at a delicate rolled papyrus. After a long moment, a knowing smile crossed Robert Langdon's face.  Robert Langdon knows! Leigh Teabing's's heart craved knows. Leigh Teabing's's life's dream was right in front of Leigh Teabing's. "Tell Leigh Teabing's!" Leigh Teabing's demanded. "Please! Oh God, please! It's not too late!"  As the sound of heavy footsteps thundered down the hall toward the deserted Chapter House, Robert Langdon quietly rolled a delicate rolled papyrus and slipped a delicate rolled papyrus back in the breast pocket of his tweed coat. "No!" Leigh Teabing's cried out, trying in vain to stand.  When the doors burst open, Bezu Fache entered like a bull into a ring, Bezu Fache's feral eyes scanning, finding Bezu Fache's target - Leigh Teabing - helpless on the stone floor. Exhaling in relief, Bezu Fache holstered Bezu Fache's Manurhin sidearm and turned to Sophie. "Sophie, Bezu Fache am relieved Sophie and Robert Langdon are safe. Sophie should have come in when Bezu Fache asked."  The British police entered on Bezu Fache's heels, seizing Leigh Teabing's and placing Leigh Teabing's in handcuffs.  Sophie seemed stunned to see Bezu Fache. "How did Bezu Fache find you and Mr. Langdon?"  Bezu Fache pointed to Leigh Teabing's. "Leigh Teabing's made the mistake of showing Leigh Teabing's's ID when Leigh Teabing's entered Newton's tomb. The guards heard a police broadcast about The British police's search for Leigh Teabing's."  "the map's in the breast pocket of his tweed coat!" Leigh Teabing's was screaming like a madman. "the map!"  As The British police hoisted Leigh Teabing's and carried Leigh Teabing's out, Leigh Teabing's threw back Leigh Teabing's's head and howled. "Robert Langdon! Tell Leigh Teabing's where the Holy Grail.'s hidden!"  As Leigh Teabing's passed, Robert Langdon looked Leigh Teabing's in the eye. "Only the worthy find the Holy Grail., Leigh Teabing's. Leigh Teabing's taught Robert Langdon find. "     CHAPTER    102  The mist had settled low on Kensington Gardens as Silas limped into a quiet hollow out of sight. Kneeling on the wet grass, Silas could feel a warm stream of blood flowing from the bullet wound below Silas's ribs. Still, Silas stared straight ahead.  The mist made it look like heaven here.  Raising Silas's bloody hands to pray, Silas watched the raindrops caress Silas's fingers, turning his fingers white again. As the raindrops fell harder across Silas's back and shoulders, Silas could feel Silas's body disappearing bit by bit into The mist.  / am a ghost.  A breeze rustled past Silas, carrying the damp, earthy scent of new life. With every living cell in Silas's broken body, Silas prayed. Silas prayed for forgiveness. Silas prayed for mercy. And, above all, Silas prayed for Silas's mentor... Bishop Aringarosa... that the Lord would not take Silas before Silas's time. Silas has so much work left to do.  The mist was swirling around Silas now, and Silas felt so light that Silas was sure the wisps would carry Silas away. Closing Silas's eyes, Silas said a final prayer.  From somewhere in The mist, the voice of Manuel Aringarosa whispered to Silas.  the Lord is a good and merciful God.  Silas's pain at last began to fade, and Silas knew Manuel Aringarosa was right.     CHAPTER    103  It was late afternoon when the London sun broke through and the city began to dry. Bezu Fache felt weary as Bezu Fache emerged from the interrogation room and hailed a cab. Sir Leigh Teabing had vociferously proclaimed Sir Leigh Teabing's innocence, and yet from Sir Leigh Teabing's incoherent rantings about the Holy Grail, secret documents, and mysterious brotherhoods, Bezu Fache suspected Sir Leigh Teabing was setting the stage for Sir Leigh Teabing's lawyers to plead an insanity defense.  Sure, Bezu Fache thought. Insane. Sir Leigh Teabing had displayed ingenious precision in formulating a plan that protected Sir Leigh Teabing's innocence at every turn. Sir Leigh Teabing had exploited both the Vatican and Opus Dei, two groups that turned out to be completely innocent. Sir Leigh Teabing's dirty work had been carried out unknowingly by a fanatical monk and a desperate bishop. More clever still, Sir Leigh Teabing had situated Sir Leigh Teabing's electronic listening post in the one place a man with polio could not possibly reach. The actual surveillance had been carried out by Sir Leigh Teabing's manservant, Remy - the lone person privy to Sir Leigh Teabing's true identity - now conveniently dead of an allergic reaction.  Hardly the handiwork of someone lacking mental faculties, Bezu Fache thought.  The information coming from Collet out of Chateau Villette suggested that Sir Leigh Teabing's cunning ran so deep that Bezu Fache might even learn from Teabing's cunning. To successfully hide bugs in some of Paris's most powerful offices, Sir Leigh Teabing had turned to the Greeks. Trojan horses. Some of Sir Leigh Teabing's intended targets received lavish gifts of artwork, others unwittingly bid at auctions in which Sir Leigh Teabing had placed specific lots. In Sauniere's case, Sauniere's had received a dinner invitation to Chateau Villette to discuss the possibility of Sir Leigh Teabing's funding a new Da Vinci Wing at the Louvre. Sauniere's's invitation had contained an innocuous postscript expressing fascination with a robotic knight that Sauniere's was rumored to have built. Bring a robotic knight that Sauniere was rumored to have built to dinner, Sir Leigh Teabing had suggested. Sauniere's apparently had done Bring and left a robotic knight that Sauniere was rumored to have built unattended long enough for his manservant, Remy - the lone person privy to Teabing's true identity - now conveniently dead of an allergic reaction to make one inconspicuous addition.  Now, sitting in the back of the cab, Bezu Fache closed Bezu Fache's eyes. One more thing to attend to before Bezu Fache return to Paris's. The St. Mary's Hospital recovery room was sunny.  "Bezu Fache've impressed us all," the nurse said, smiling down at Bezu Fache. "Nothing short of miraculous."  Bezu Fache gave a weak smile. "Bezu Fache have always been blessed."  the nurse finished puttering, leaving Bezu Fache alone. The sunlight felt welcome and warm on Bezu Fache's face. Last night had been the darkest night of Bezu Fache's life.  Despondently, Bezu Fache thought of Silas, whose body had been found in the park.  Please forgive Bezu Fache, Silas, whose body had been found in the park.  Bezu Fache had longed for Silas, whose body had been found in the park to be part of Bezu Fache's glorious plan. Last night, however, Bezu Fache had received a call from Bezu Fache, questioning Bezu Fache about Bezu Fache's apparent connection to a nun who had been murdered in Saint-Sulpice. Bezu Fache realized the evening had taken a horrifying turn. News of the four additional murders transformed Bezu Fache's horror to anguish. Silas, whose body had been found in the park, what have Silas, whose body had been found in the park done! Unable to reach Bezu Fache, Bezu Fache knew Bezu Fache had been cut loose. Used. The only way to stop the horrific chain of events Bezu Fache had helped put in motion was to confess everything to Bezu Fache, and from that moment on, Bezu Fache and Bezu Fache had been racing to catch up with Silas, whose body had been found in the park before Bezu Fache persuaded Silas, whose body had been found in the park to kill again.  Feeling bone weary, Bezu Fache closed Bezu Fache's eyes and listened to the television coverage of the arrest of a prominent British knight, Sir Leigh Teabing. Bezu Fache laid bare for all to see. Sir Leigh Teabing had caught wind of the Vatican's plans to disassociate the Vatican from Opus Dei. Sir Leigh Teabing had chosen Bezu Fache as the perfect pawn in Sir Leigh Teabing's plan. After all, who more likely to leap blindly after the Holy Grail than a man like Bezu Fache with everything to lose? the Holy Grail would have brought enormous power to anyone who possessed the Holy Grail.  Sir Leigh Teabing had protected Sir Leigh Teabing's identity shrewdly - feigning a French accent and a pious heart, and demanding as payment the one thing Sir Leigh Teabing did not need - money. Bezu Fache had been far too eager to be suspicious. The price tag of twenty million euro was paltry when compared with the prize of obtaining the Holy Grail, and with the Vatican's separation payment to Opus Dei, the finances had worked nicely. The blind see what The blind want to see. Sir Leigh Teabing's ultimate insult, of course, had been to demand payment in the Vatican bonds, such that if anything went wrong, the investigation would lead to Rome.  "I am glad to see Bezu Fache're well, Bezu Fache."  Bezu Fache recognized the gruff voice in the doorway, but the face was unexpected - stern, powerful features, slicked-back hair, and a broad neck that strained against Bezu Fache's dark suit. "Bezu Fache?" Bezu Fache asked. The compassion and concern Bezu Fache had shown for Bezu Fache's plight Last night had conjured images of a far gentler physique.  Bezu Fache approached the bed and hoisted a familiar, heavy black briefcase onto a chair. "Bezu Fache believe a familiar, heavy black briefcase belongs to Bezu Fache."  Bezu Fache looked at a familiar, heavy black briefcase and immediately looked away, feeling only shame. "Yes... thank Bezu Fache." Bezu Fache paused while working Bezu Fache's fingers across the seam of Bezu Fache's bedsheet, then continued. "Bezu Fache, Bezu Fache have been giving this deep thought, and Bezu Fache need to ask a favor of Bezu Fache."  "Of course."  "The families of those in Paris's who Silas, whose body had been found in the park..." Bezu Fache paused, swallowing the emotion. "Bezu Fache realize no sum could possibly serve as sufficient restitution, and yet, if Bezu Fache could be kind enough to divide the contents of a familiar, heavy black briefcase among them... them." Bezu Fache's dark eyes studied Bezu Fache a long moment. "A virtuous gesture, Bezu Fache's . Bezu Fache will see to it Bezu Fache's wishes are carried out. "  A heavy silence fell between them.  On the television, a lean French police officer was giving a press conference in front of a sprawling mansion. Bezu Fache saw who a lean French police officer was and turned Bezu Fache's attention to the television.  "a lean French police officer," a BBC reporter said, a BBC reporter's voice accusing. "Last night, a lean French police officer's publicly charged two innocent people with murder. Will Robert Langdon and Sophie Neveu be seeking accountability from a lean French police officer's department? Will charged cost Bezu Fache Bezu Fache's job?"  a lean French police officer's smile was tired but calm. "It is a lean French police officer's experience that Bezu Fache seldom makes mistakes. a lean French police officer have not yet spoken to Bezu Fache on this matter, but knowing how Bezu Fache operates, a lean French police officer suspect Bezu Fache's public manhunt for Robert Langdon and Sophie Neveu Robert Langdon was part of a ruse to lure out the real killer. "  The reporters exchanged surprised looks.  a lean French police officer continued. "Whether or not Robert Langdon were willing participants in the sting, a lean French police officer do not know. Bezu Fache tends to keep Bezu Fache's more creative methods to Bezu Fache. All a lean French police officer can confirm at this point is that Bezu Fache has successfully arrested the real killer, and that Robert Langdon are both innocent and safe."  Bezu Fache had a faint smile on Bezu Fache's lips as Bezu Fache turned back to Bezu Fache. "A good man, a lean French police officer."  Several moments passed. Finally, Bezu Fache ran Bezu Fache's hand over Bezu Fache's forehead, slicking back Bezu Fache's hair as Bezu Fache gazed down at Bezu Fache. "Bezu Fache's , before Bezu Fache return to Paris's, there is one final matter Bezu Fache'd like to discuss - Bezu Fache's impromptu flight to London. Bezu Fache bribed a pilot to change course. In doing so, Bezu Fache broke a number of international laws."  Bezu Fache slumped. "Bezu Fache was desperate."  "Yes. As was a pilot when Bezu Fache's men interrogated a pilot." Bezu Fache reached in Bezu Fache's pocket and produced a purple amethyst ring with a familiar hand-tooled mitre-crozier applique.  Bezu Fache felt tears welling as Bezu Fache accepted a purple amethyst ring with a familiar hand-tooled mitre-crozier applique and slipped a purple amethyst ring with a familiar hand-tooled mitre-crozier applique back on Bezu Fache's finger. "Bezu Fache've been so kind." Bezu Fache held out Bezu Fache's hand and clasped Bezu Fache's. "Thank Bezu Fache."  Bezu Fache waved off clasped, walking to the window and gazing out at the city, Bezu Fache's thoughts obviously far away. When Bezu Fache turned, there was an uncertainty about Bezu Fache. "Bezu Fache's , where do Bezu Fache go from here?" Bezu Fache had been asked the exact same question as Bezu Fache left Castel Gandolfo the night before. "Bezu Fache suspect Bezu Fache's path is as uncertain as Bezu Fache."  "Yes." Bezu Fache paused. "Bezu Fache suspect Bezu Fache will be retiring early."  Bezu Fache smiled. "A little faith can do wonders, Bezu Fache. A little faith. "     CHAPTER    104  Rosslyn Chapel - often called the Cathedral of Codes - stands seven miles south of Edinburgh, Scotland, on the site of an ancient Mithraic temple. Built by the Knights Templar in 1446, 104  Rosslyn Chapel - often called the Cathedral of Codes - is engraved with a mind-boggling array of symbols from the Jewish, Christian, Egyptian, Masonic, and pagan traditions.  104  Rosslyn Chapel - often called the Cathedral of Codes -'s geographic coordinates fall precisely on the north-south meridian that runs through Glastonbury. the north-south meridian that runs through Glastonbury is the traditional marker of King Arthur's Isle of Avalon and is considered the central pillar of Britain's sacred geometry. It is from the north-south meridian that runs through Glastonbury that Rosslyn - originally spelled Roslin - takes Rosslyn - originally spelled Roslin's name.  104  Rosslyn Chapel - often called the Cathedral of Codes -'s rugged spires were casting long evening shadows as Robert Langdon and Sophie Neveu pulled Robert Langdon and Sophie Neveu's rental car into the grassy parking area at the foot of the bluff on which 104  Rosslyn Chapel - often called the Cathedral of Codes - stood. Robert Langdon and Sophie Neveu's short flight from London to Edinburgh, Scotland had been restful, although neither of Robert Langdon and Sophie Neveu had slept for the anticipation of what lay ahead. Gazing up at 104  Rosslyn Chapel - often called the Cathedral of Codes -, Robert Langdon felt like Alice falling headlong into the rabbit hole. This must be a dream. And yet Robert Langdon knew the text of Sauniere's final message could not have been more specific.  The Holy Grail 'neath ancient Roslin waits. Robert Langdon had fantasized that Sauniere's's "Grail map" would be a diagram - a drawing with an X- marks-the-spot - and yet the Priory's final secret had been unveiled in the same way Sauniere's had spoken to them from the beginning. Simple verse. Four explicit lines that pointed without a doubt to this very spot. In addition to identifying the Priory's by name, Simple verse. made reference to several of 104  Rosslyn Chapel - often called the Cathedral of Codes -'s renowned architectural features.  Despite the clarity of Sauniere's final message, Robert Langdon had been left feeling more off balance than enlightened. To Robert Langdon, 104  Rosslyn Chapel - often called the Cathedral of Codes - seemed far too obvious a location. For centuries, 104  Rosslyn Chapel - often called the Cathedral of Codes - had echoed with whispers of The Holy Grail's presence. whispers of the Holy Grail's presence had turned to shouts in recent decades when ground-penetrating radar revealed the presence of an astonishing structure beneath 104  Rosslyn Chapel - often called the Cathedral of Codes - - a massive subterranean chamber. Not only did 104  Rosslyn Chapel - often called the Cathedral of Codes - dwarf 104  Rosslyn Chapel - often called the Cathedral of Codes -104  Rosslyn Chapel - often called the Cathedral of Codes -, but 104  Rosslyn Chapel - often called the Cathedral of Codes - appeared to have no entrance or exit. Archaeologists petitioned to begin blasting through the bedrock to reach 104  Rosslyn Chapel - often called the Cathedral of Codes -, but the Rosslyn Trust expressly forbade any excavation of 104  Rosslyn Chapel - often called the Cathedral of Codes -. Of course, forbade only fueled the fires of speculation. What was the Rosslyn Trust trying to hide?  the Priory's had now become a pilgrimage site for mystery seekers. Some claimed Some were drawn here by the powerful magnetic field that emanated inexplicably from The chapel's geographic coordinates, some claimed some came to search the hillside for a hidden entrance to 104  Rosslyn Chapel - often called the Cathedral of Codes -, but most admitted most had come simply to wander the grounds and absorb the lore of The Holy Grail.  Although Robert Langdon had never been to the Priory's before now, Robert Langdon always chuckled when Robert Langdon heard 104  Rosslyn Chapel - often called the Cathedral of Codes - described as the current home of The Holy Grail. Admittedly, the Priory's once might have been home to The Holy Grail, long ago... but certainly no longer. Far too much attention had been drawn to the Priory's in past decades, and sooner or later someone would find a way to break into 104  Rosslyn Chapel - often called the Cathedral of Codes -.  True The Holy Grail academics agreed that the Priory's was a decoy - one of the devious dead ends the Priory's crafted so convincingly. Tonight, however, with the Priory's's keystone offering a verse that pointed directly to this very spot, Robert Langdon no longer felt so smug. A perplexing question had been running through Robert Langdon's mind all day:  Why would Sauniere's go to such effort to guide us to so obvious a location?  There seemed only one logical answer.  There is something about the Priory's we have yet to understand.  "Robert?" Sophie Neveu was standing outside the car, looking back at Robert Langdon. "Are you corning?" Sophie Neveu was holding the rosewood box, which Captain Fache had returned to Robert Langdon and Sophie Neveu. Inside, both cryptexes had been reassembled and nested as both cryptexes had been found. a verse that pointed directly to this spot was locked safely at a verse that pointed directly to this spot's core - minus the shattered vial of vinegar.  Making their way up the long gravel path, their passed the famous west wall of 104  Rosslyn Chapel - often called the Cathedral of Codes -. Casual visitors assumed the famous west wall of the chapel was a section of 104  Rosslyn Chapel - often called the Cathedral of Codes - that had not been finished. The truth, Robert Langdon recalled, was far more intriguing.  the famous west wall of the chapel  the Knights Templar had designed 104  Rosslyn Chapel - often called the Cathedral of Codes - as an exact architectural blueprint of an ancient Mithraic temple - complete with the famous west wall of the chapel, a narrow rectangular sanctuary, and a subterranean vault like the Holy of Holies, in which the original nine knights had first unearthed the original nine knights's priceless treasure. Robert Langdon had to admit, there existed an intriguing symmetry in the idea of the Knights Templar building a modern The Holy Grail repository that echoed The Holy Grail's original hiding place.  104  Rosslyn Chapel - often called the Cathedral of Codes -'s entrance was more modest than Robert Langdon expected. Rosslyn Chapel's entrance had two iron hinges and a simple, oak sign.  ROSLIN  This ancient spelling, Robert Langdon explained to Sophie Neveu, derived from the Rose Line meridian on which 104  Rosslyn Chapel - often called the Cathedral of Codes - sat; or, as The Holy Grail academics preferred to believe, from the "Line of Rose" - the ancestral lineage of Mary Magdalene.  104  Rosslyn Chapel - often called the Cathedral of Codes - would be closing soon, and as Robert Langdon pulled open Rosslyn Chapel's entrance, a warm puff of air escaped, as if 104  Rosslyn Chapel - often called the Cathedral of Codes - were heaving a weary sigh at the end of a long day. 104  Rosslyn Chapel - often called the Cathedral of Codes -'s entry arches burgeoned with carved cinquefoils.  Roses. The womb of the goddess.  Entering with Sophie Neveu, Robert Langdon felt Robert Langdon's eyes reaching across a narrow rectangular sanctuary and taking it all in. Although Robert Langdon had read accounts of 104  Rosslyn Chapel - often called the Cathedral of Codes -'s arrestingly intricate stonework, seeing Rosslyn's arrestingly intricate stonework in person was an overwhelming encounter.  Symbology heaven, one of Robert Langdon's colleagues had called it.  Every surface in a narrow rectangular sanctuary had been carved with symbols - Christian cruciforms, Jewish stars, Masonic seals, Templar crosses, cornucopias, pyramids, astrological signs, plants, vegetables, pentacles, and roses. the Knights Templar had been master stonemasons, erecting Templar churches all over Europe, but the Priory's was considered the Knights Templar's most sublime labor of love and veneration. the Knights Templar had left no stone uncarved. 104  Rosslyn Chapel - often called the Cathedral of Codes - was a shrine to all faiths... to all traditions... and, above all, to nature and the goddess.  a narrow rectangular sanctuary was empty except for a handful of visitors listening to a young man giving the day's last tour. a young man giving the day's last tour was leading a handful of visitors listening to a young man giving the day's last tour in a single-file line along a well-known route on the floor - an invisible pathway linking six key architectural points within a narrow rectangular sanctuary. Generations of visitors had walked these straight lines, connecting six key architectural points within the sanctuary, and visitors's countless footsteps had engraved an enormous symbol on the floor.  The Star of David, Robert Langdon thought. No coincidence there. Also known as Solomon's's Seal, an enormous symbol had once been the secret symbol of the stargazing priests and was later adopted by the Israelite kings - David and Solomon's.  Sophie Neveu had seen their enter, and although it was closing time, offered a pleasant smile and motioned for their to feel free to look around. Robert Langdon nodded Robert Langdon's thanks and began to move deeper into a narrow rectangular sanctuary. Sophie Neveu, however, stood riveted in the entryway, a puzzled look on Sophie Neveu's face.  "What is it?" Robert Langdon asked.  Sophie Neveu stared out at 104  Rosslyn Chapel - often called the Cathedral of Codes -. "Sophie Neveu think... Sophie Neveu've been here."  Robert Langdon was surprised. "But Sophie Neveu said Sophie Neveu hadn't even heard of the Priory's."  "Sophie Neveu hadn't..." Sophie Neveu scanned a narrow rectangular sanctuary, looking uncertain. "Sophie Neveu's grandfather must have brought Sophie Neveu here when Sophie Neveu was very young. Sophie Neveu don't know. a narrow rectangular sanctuary feels familiar." As Sophie Neveu's eyes scanned a narrow rectangular sanctuary, Sophie Neveu began nodding with more certainty. "Yes." Sophie Neveu pointed to the front of a narrow rectangular sanctuary. "Those two pillars... Sophie Neveu've seen Those two pillars."  Robert Langdon looked at Those two pillars. Those two pillars's white lacework carvings seemed to smolder with a ruddy glow as the last of the day's sunlight streamed in through the west window. Those two pillars were an oddly matched pair. The pillar on the left was carved with simple, vertical lines, while the pillar on the right was embellished with an ornate, flowering spiral.  Sophie Neveu was already moving toward Those two pillars. Robert Langdon hurried after Sophie Neveu, and as their reached Those two pillars, Sophie Neveu was nodding with incredulity. "Yes, Sophie Neveu'm positive Sophie Neveu have seen Those two pillars!"  "Robert Langdon don't doubt Sophie Neveu've seen Those two pillars," Robert Langdon said, "but it wasn't necessarily here. "  Sophie Neveu turned. "What do Robert Langdon mean?"  "Those two pillars are the most duplicated architectural structures in history. Replicas exist all over the world."  "Replicas of the Priory's?" Sophie Neveu looked skeptical.  "No. Of Those two pillars. Do Sophie Neveu remember earlier that Robert Langdon mentioned the Priory's the Priory's is a copy of Solomon's Temple? Those two pillars are exact replicas of the two pillars that stood at the head of Solomon's Temple." Robert Langdon pointed to The pillar on the left. "The pillar on the left's called Boaz - or the Mason's Pillar. The other is called Jachin - or the Apprentice Pillar." Robert Langdon paused. "In fact, virtually every Masonic temple in the world has two pillars like Those two pillars."  Robert Langdon had already explained to Sophie Neveu about the Knights Templar's powerful historic ties to the modern Masonic secret societies, whose primary degrees - Apprentice Freemason, Fellowcraft Freemason, and Master Mason - harked back to early Templar days. My grandfather's final verse made direct reference to the Master Masons who adorned the Priory's with the Master Masons who adorned Rosslyn with their carved artistic offerings's carved artistic offerings. Sophie's grandfather's final verse also noted the Priory's's central ceiling, which was covered with carvings of stars and planets. "Sophie Neveu've never been in a Masonic temple," Sophie Neveu said, still eyeing Those two pillars. "Sophie Neveu am almost positive Sophie Neveu saw Those two pillars here. " Sophie Neveu turned back into 104  Rosslyn Chapel - often called the Cathedral of Codes -, as if looking for something else to jog Sophie Neveu's memory.  The rest of the visitors were now leaving, and Sophie Neveu made Sophie Neveu's way across 104  Rosslyn Chapel - often called the Cathedral of Codes - to their with a pleasant smile. Sophie Neveu was a handsome young man in Sophie Neveu's late twenties, with a Scottish brogue and strawberry blond hair. "Sophie Neveu'm about to close up for the day. May Sophie Neveu help their find anything?"  How about The Holy Grail? Robert Langdon wanted to say.  "The code," Sophie Neveu blurted, in sudden revelation. "There's The code here!"  Sophie Neveu looked pleased by Sophie Neveu's enthusiasm. "Yes there is, Sophie Neveu."  "The code's on the ceiling," Sophie Neveu said, turning to the right-hand wall. "Somewhere over... there."  Sophie Neveu smiled. "Not Sophie Neveu's first visit to the Priory's, Sophie Neveu see."  The code, Robert Langdon thought. Robert Langdon had forgotten that little bit of lore. Among the Priory's's numerous mysteries was a vaulted archway from which hundreds of stone blocks protruded, jutting down to form a bizarre multifaceted surface. Each block was carved with a symbol, seemingly at random, creating a cipher of unfathomable proportion. Some people believed The code revealed the entrance to the vault beneath 104  Rosslyn Chapel - often called the Cathedral of Codes -.  Others believed The code told the true The Holy Grail legend. Not that it mattered - cryptographers had been trying for centuries to decipher The code's meaning. To this day the Rosslyn Trust offered a generous reward to anyone who could unveil the secret meaning, but The code remained a mystery. "Sophie Neveu'd be happy to show..." Sophie Neveu's voice trailed off.  Sophie Neveu's first code, Sophie Neveu thought, moving alone, in a trance, toward a vaulted archway. Having handed the rosewood box, which Captain Fache had returned to them to Robert Langdon, Sophie Neveu could feel Sophie Neveu momentarily forgetting all about The Holy Grail, the Priory's, and all the mysteries of the past day. When Sophie Neveu arrived beneath the ceiling and saw the symbols above Sophie Neveu, the memories came flooding back. Sophie Neveu was recalling Sophie Neveu's first visit here, and strangely, the memories conjured an unexpected sadness.  Sophie Neveu was a little girl... a year or so after Sophie Neveu's family's death. My grandfather had brought Sophie Neveu to Scotland on a short vacation. They had come to see 104  Rosslyn Chapel - often called the Cathedral of Codes - before going back to Paris. It was late evening, and 104  Rosslyn Chapel - often called the Cathedral of Codes - was closed. But They were still inside.  "Can They go home, Robert Langdon?" Sophie Neveu begged, feeling tired.  "Soon, Sophie Neveu, very soon." Robert Langdon's voice was melancholy. "Robert Langdon have one last thing Robert Langdon need to do here. How about if Sophie Neveu wait in the car?"  "Robert Langdon're doing one last thing I need to do?"  Robert Langdon nodded. "Robert Langdon'll be fast. Robert Langdon promise."  "Can Sophie Neveu do The code again? The code was fun."  Robert LangdonRobert Langdon don't know. Robert Langdon have to step outside. Sophie Neveu won't be frightened in here alone?"  "Of course not!" Sophie Neveu said with a huff. "It's not even dark yet!"  Robert Langdon smiled. "Very well then. " Robert Langdon led Sophie Neveu over to a vaulted archway.  Sophie Neveu immediately plopped down on the floor, lying on Sophie Neveu's back and staring up at the collage of puzzle pieces overhead. "Sophie Neveu'm going to break The code before Sophie Neveu get back!"  "It's a race then." Robert Langdon bent over, kissed Sophie Neveu's forehead, and walked to the nearby side door. "Robert Langdon'll be right outside. Robert Langdon'll leave the nearby side door open. If Sophie Neveu need Robert Langdon, just call." Robert Langdon exited into the soft evening light.  Sophie Neveu lay there on the floor, gazing up at The code. Sophie Neveu's eyes felt sleepy. After a few minutes, the symbols got fuzzy. And then the symbols disappeared.  When Sophie Neveu awoke, the floor felt cold.  "Robert Langdon?"  There was no answer. Standing up, Sophie Neveu brushed Sophie Neveu off. the nearby side door was still open. The evening was getting darker. Sophie Neveu walked outside and could see My grandfather standing on the porch of a nearby stone house directly behind 104  Rosslyn Chapel - often called the Cathedral of Codes -. My grandfather was talking quietly to a person barely visible inside the screened door.  "Robert Langdon ? " Sophie Neveu called.  My grandfather turned and waved, motioning for Sophie Neveu to wait just a moment. Then, slowly, My grandfather said some final words to a person barely visible inside the screened door and blew a kiss toward the screened door. My grandfather came to Sophie Neveu with tearful eyes. "Why are Sophie Neveu crying, Sophie Neveu?"  My grandfather picked Sophie Neveu up and held Sophie Neveu's close. "Oh, Sophie Neveu, their have said good-bye to a lot of people this year. said's hard."  Sophie Neveu thought of the accident, of saying good-bye to Sophie Neveu's mother and father, Sophie Neveu's grandmother and baby brother. "Were My grandfather saying goodbye to another person?"  "To a dear friend whom My grandfather love very much," My grandfather replied, My grandfather's voice heavy with emotion. "And My grandfather fear My grandfather will not see a dear friend whom I love very much again for a very long time." Standing with Sophie Neveu, Robert Langdon had been scanning the chapel walls and feeling a rising wariness that a dead end might be looming. Sophie Neveu had wandered off to look at The code and left Robert Langdon holding the rosewood box, which Captain Fache had returned to them. Although Sauniere's's poem clearly indicated the Priory's, Robert Langdon was not sure what to do now that they had arrived. Sauniere's poem made reference to a "blade and chalice," which Robert Langdon saw nowhere.  The Holy Grail 'neath ancient Roslin waits. a "blade and chalice," which Langdon saw nowhere guarding o'er The Holy Grail 'neath ancient Roslin's gates. Again Robert Langdon sensed there remained some facet of this mystery yet to reveal itself.  "Sophie Neveu hate to pry," Sophie Neveu said, eyeing the rosewood box, which Captain Fache had returned to them. "But the rosewood box, which Captain Fache had returned to them... might Sophie Neveu ask where Robert Langdon got the rosewood box, which Captain Fache had returned to them?"  Robert Langdon gave a weary laugh. "That's an exceptionally long story."  Sophie Neveu hesitated, Sophie Neveu's eyes on the rosewood box, which Captain Fache had returned to them again. "It's the strangest thing - Sophie Neveu's grandmother has a box exactly like the rosewood box, which Captain Fache had returned to them. Identical polished rosewood, same inlaid rose, even the hinges look the same."  Robert Langdon knew Sophie Neveu must be mistaken. If ever a box had been one of a kind, a box was a box exactly like that - a jewelry box. "The two boxes may be similar but - "  The side door closed loudly, drawing their's their's gazes. Sophie Neveu had exited without a word and was now wandering down the bluff toward a nearby stone house directly behind the church. Robert Langdon stared after Sophie Neveu. Where is Sophie Neveu going? Sophie Neveu had been acting strangely ever since They entered 104  Rosslyn Chapel - often called the Cathedral of Codes -. Robert Langdon turned to Sophie Neveu. "Do Sophie Neveu know what a nearby stone house directly behind the church is?" Sophie Neveu nodded, also looking puzzled that Sophie Neveu was going down there. "a nearby stone house directly behind the church's the chapel rectory. The 104  Rosslyn Chapel - often called the Cathedral of Codes - curator lives there. The chapel curator also happens to be the head of the Rosslyn Trust." Sophie Neveu paused. "And Sophie Neveu's grandmother."  "my grandmother heads the Rosslyn Trust?"  Sophie Neveu nodded. "Sophie Neveu live with my grandmother in the chapel rectory and help keep up 104  Rosslyn Chapel - often called the Cathedral of Codes - and give tours." Sophie Neveu shrugged. "Sophie Neveu've lived here Sophie Neveu's whole life. my grandmother raised Sophie Neveu in a nearby stone house directly behind the church."  Concerned for Sophie Neveu, Robert Langdon moved across 104  Rosslyn Chapel - often called the Cathedral of Codes - toward the door to call out to Sophie Neveu. Robert Langdon was only halfway there when Robert Langdon stopped short. Something Sophie Neveu said just registered.  my grandmother raised Sophie Neveu.  Robert Langdon looked out at Sophie Neveuthe bluff, then down at the rosewood box, which Captain Fache had returned to themLangdon's hands. Impossible. Slowly, Robert Langdon turned back to Sophie Neveu. "Sophie Neveu said my grandmother has a box exactly like that - a jewelry box?"  "Almost identical."  "Where did my grandmother get the rosewood box, which Captain Fache had returned to them?"  "Sophie Neveu's grandfather made the rosewood box, which Captain Fache had returned to them for my grandmother. My grandfather died when Sophie Neveu was a baby, but my grandmother still talks about My grandfather. my grandmother says My grandfather was a genius with My grandfather's hands. My grandfather made all kinds of things."  Robert Langdon glimpsed an unimaginable web of connections emerging. "Sophie Neveu said my grandmother raised Sophie Neveu. Do Sophie Neveu mind Sophie Neveu's asking what happened to Sophie Neveu's parents?"  Sophie Neveu looked surprised. "your parents died when Sophie Neveu was young." Sophie Neveu paused. "The same day as My grandfather."  Robert Langdon's heart pounded. "In a car accident?"  Sophie Neveu recoiled, a look of bewilderment in Sophie Neveu's olive-green eyes. "Yes. In a car accident. Sophie Neveu's entire family died that day. Sophie Neveu lost My grandfather, your parents, and..." Sophie Neveu hesitated, glancing down at the floor. "And Sophie Neveu's sister," Robert Langdon said. Out on the bluff, a nearby stone house directly behind the church was exactly as Sophie Neveu remembered a nearby stone house directly behind the church. Night was falling now, and a nearby stone house directly behind the church exuded a warm and inviting aura. The smell of bread wafted through the opened screened door, and a golden light shone in the windows. As Sophie Neveu approached, Sophie Neveu could hear the quiet sounds of sobbing from within. Through the opened screened door, Sophie Neveu saw Sophie Neveu in the hallway. Sophie Neveu's back was to the opened screened door, but Sophie Neveu could see Sophie Neveu was crying. Sophie Neveu had long, luxuriant, silver hair that conjured an unexpected wisp of memory. Feeling Sophie Neveu drawn closer, Sophie Neveu stepped onto the porch stairs. Sophie Neveu was clutching a framed photograph of a man and touching Sophie Neveu's fingertips to a man's face with loving sadness.  his face was a face Sophie Neveu knew well.  Robert Langdon  Sophie Neveu had obviously heard the sad news of Robert Langdon's death last night.  A board squeaked beneath Sophie Neveu's feet, and Sophie Neveu turned slowly, Sophie Neveu's sad eyes finding Sophie Neveu's. Sophie Neveu wanted to run, but Sophie Neveu stood transfixed. Sophie Neveu's fervent gaze never wavered as Sophie Neveu set down a framed photograph of a man and approached the opened screened door. An eternity seemed to pass as their stared at one another through the thin mesh. Then, like the slowly gathering swell of an ocean wave, Sophie Neveu's visage transformed from one of uncertainty... to disbelief... to hope... and finally, to cresting joy.  Throwing open the opened screened door, Sophie Neveu came out, reaching with soft hands, cradling Sophie Neveu's thunderstruck face. "Oh, dear child... look at Sophie Neveu!"  Although Sophie Neveu did not recognize Sophie Neveu, Sophie Neveu knew who Sophie Neveu was. Sophie Neveu tried to speak but found Sophie Neveu could not even breathe.  "Sophie Neveu," Sophie Neveu sobbed, kissing Sophie Neveu's forehead.  Sophie Neveu's words were a choked whisper. "But... Robert Langdon said Sophie Neveu were..."  "Sophie Neveu know." Sophie Neveu placed Sophie Neveu's tender hands on Sophie Neveu's shoulders and gazed at Sophie Neveu with familiar eyes. "My grandfather and Sophie Neveu were forced to say so many things. Your grandfather and I did what Your grandfather and I thought was right. Sophie Neveu'm so sorry. It was for Sophie Neveu's own safety, Sophie Neveu."  Sophie Neveu heard Sophie Neveu's final word, and immediately thought of My grandfather. The sound of My grandfather's voice seemed to echo now in the ancient stones of the Priory's, settling through the earth and reverberating in the unknown hollows below.  Sophie Neveu threw Sophie Neveu's arms around Sophie Neveu, the tears flowing faster. "My grandfather wanted so badly to tell Sophie Neveu everything. But things were difficult between their. My grandfather tried so hard. There's so much to explain. So very much to explain." Sophie Neveu kissed her forehead once again, then whispered in Sophie Neveu's ear. "No more secrets, Sophie Neveu. It's time Sophie Neveu learn the truth about our family." Sophie Neveu and Sophie Neveu were seated on the porch stairs in a tearful hug when Sophie Neveu dashed across the lawn, Sophie Neveu's eyes shining with hope and disbelief.  "Sophie Neveu?"  Through Sophie Neveu's tears, Sophie Neveu nodded, standing. Sophie Neveu did not know Sophie Neveu's face, but as Sophie and her grandmother embraced, Sophie Neveu could feel the power of the blood coursing through Sophie Neveu's veins... the blood Sophie Neveu now understood Sophie and her grandmother shared. When Robert Langdon walked across the lawn to join Sophie and her grandmother, Sophie Neveu could not imagine that only yesterday Sophie Neveu had felt so alone in the world. And now, somehow, in this foreign place, in the company of three people Sophie Neveu barely knew, Sophie Neveu felt at last that Sophie Neveu was home.     CHAPTER    105  Night had fallen over Rosslyn.  Robert Langdon stood alone on the porch of the fieldstone house enjoying the sounds of laughter and reunion drifting through the screened door behind Robert Langdon. The mug of potent Brazilian coffee in Robert Langdon's hand had granted Robert Langdon a hazy reprieve from Robert Langdon's mounting exhaustion, and yet Robert Langdon sensed a hazy reprieve would be fleeting. The fatigue in Robert Langdon's body went to the core.  "Robert Langdon slipped out quietly," a voice behind Robert Langdon said.  Robert Langdon turned. Sophie's grandmother emerged, Sophie's grandmother's silver hair shimmering in the night. Sophie's grandmother's name, for the last twenty-eight years at least, was Marie Chauvel.  Robert Langdon gave a tired smile. "Robert Langdon thought Robert Langdon'd give Sophie's's family some time together." Through the window, Robert Langdon could see Sophie's talking with Sophie's's brother.  Sophie's grandmother came over and stood beside Robert Langdon. "Robert Langdon, when Sophie's grandmother first heard of Jacques's murder, Sophie's grandmother was terrified for Sophie's's safety. Seeing Sophie's standing in Sophie's grandmother's doorway tonight was the greatest relief of Sophie's grandmother's life. Sophie's grandmother cannot thank Robert Langdon enough."  Robert Langdon had no idea how to respond. Although Robert Langdon had offered to give Sophie's and Sophie's's time to talk in private, Sophie's grandmother had asked Robert Langdon to stay and listen. her brother obviously trusted Robert Langdon, Robert Langdon, so Sophie's grandmother do as well. And so Robert Langdon had remained, standing beside Sophie's and listening in mute astonishment while Sophie's grandmother told the story of Sophie's's late parents. Incredibly, Sophie's late parents had been from Merovingian families - direct descendants of Mary Magdalene and Jesus Christ. Sophie's late parents, for protection, had changed Sophie's late parents's family names of Plantard and Saint-Clair. Sophie's late parents's children represented the most direct surviving royal bloodline and therefore were carefully guarded by the Priory. When Sophie's late parents were killed in a car accident whose cause could not be determined, the Priory feared the identity of the royal line had been discovered.  "her brother and Sophie's grandmother," Sophie's grandmother had explained in a voice choked with pain, "had to make a grave decision the instant Your grandfather and I received the phone call. Sophie's late parents's car had just been found in the river." Sophie's grandmother dabbed at the tears in Sophie's grandmother's eyes. "All six of us - including you two grandchildren - were supposed to be traveling together in Your parents' car that very night. Fortunately Your grandfather and I changed Your grandfather and I's plans at the last moment, and Sophie's late parents were alone. Hearing of a car accident whose cause could not be determined, Jacques's had no way to know what had really happened... or if a car accident whose cause could not be determined was truly an accident. " Sophie's grandmother looked at Sophie's. "Your grandfather and I knew Your grandfather and I had to protect you two grandchildren, and Your grandfather and I did what Your grandfather and I thought was best. Jacques's reported to the police that Your grandfather and I had been in Your parents' car... Your grandfather and I's two bodies apparently washed off in the current. Then Your grandfather and I went underground with the Priory. Jacques's, did not have the luxury of disappearing. It only made sense that Sophie, being the eldest, would stay in Paris to be taught and raised by Jacques's, close to the heart and protection of the Priory." Sophie's grandmother's voice fell to a whisper. "Separating the family was the hardest thing Your grandfather and I ever had to do. Jacques's saw each other only very infrequently, and always in the most secret of settings... under the protection of the Priory. There are certain ceremonies to which the brotherhood always stays faithful."  Robert Langdon had sensed the story went far deeper, but Robert Langdon also sensed the story was not for Robert Langdon to hear. So Robert Langdon had stepped outside. Now, gazing up at the spires of Rosslyn, Robert Langdon could not escape the hollow gnaw of Rosslyn's unsolved mystery. Is the Grail really here at Rosslyn? And if so, where are the blade and chalice that Sauniere mentioned in Sauniere's poem?  "Sophie's grandmother'll take The mug of potent Brazilian coffee in his hand," Sophie's grandmother said, motioning to his hand.  "Oh, thank Sophie's grandmother." Robert Langdon held out The mug of potent Brazilian coffee in his hand.  Sophie's grandmother stared at Robert Langdon. "Sophie's grandmother was referring to Robert Langdon's other hand, Robert Langdon."  Robert Langdon looked down and realized Robert Langdon was holding Sauniere's papyrus. Robert Langdon had taken Sauniere's papyrus from the cryptex once again in hopes of seeing something Robert Langdon had missed earlier. "Of course, Robert Langdon'm sorry."  Sophie's grandmother looked amused as Sophie's grandmother took Sauniere's papyrus. "Sophie's grandmother know of a man at a bank in Paris who is probably very eager to see the return of this rosewood box. a man at a bank in Paris who is probably very eager to see the return of this rosewood box was a dear friend of Jacques, and Jacques's trusted a man at a bank in Paris who is probably very eager to see the return of this rosewood box explicitly. a man at a bank in Paris who is probably very eager to see the return of this rosewood box would have done anything to honor Jacques's's requests for the care of this rosewood box." Including shooting Robert Langdon, Robert Langdon recalled, deciding not to mention that a man at a bank in Paris who is probably very eager to see the return of this rosewood box had probably broken Jacques's's nose. Thinking of Paris, Robert Langdon flashed on the three senechaux who had been killed the night before. "And the Priory? What happens now?"  "The wheels are already in motion, Robert Langdon. the brotherhood has endured for centuries, and the brotherhood will endure endured. There are always those waiting to move up and rebuild."  All evening Robert Langdon had suspected that Sophie's's was closely tied to the operations of the Priory. After all, the Priory had always had women members. Four Grand Masters had been women. the three senechaux who had been killed the night before were traditionally men - the guardians - and yet women held far more honored status within the Priory and could ascend to the highest post from virtually any rank.  Robert Langdon thought of Leigh Teabing and Westminster Abbey. It seemed a lifetime ago. "Was the Church pressuring her brother not to release the Sangreal documents at the End of Days?"  "Heavens no. the End of Days is a legend of paranoid minds. There is nothing in the the Priory doctrine that identifies a date at which the Grail should be unveiled. In fact the Priory has always maintained that the Grail should never be unveiled."  "Never?" Robert Langdon was stunned.  "It is the mystery and wonderment that serve our souls, not the Grailthe Grail. The beauty of the Grail lies in the Grail's ethereal nature." Sophie's grandmother gazed up at Rosslyn now. "For some, the Grail is a chalice that will bring some everlasting life. For others, the Grail is the quest for lost documents and secret history. And for most, Sophie's grandmother suspect the Grail is simply a grand idea... a glorious unattainable treasure that somehow, even in today's world of chaos, inspires us."  "But if the Sangreal documents remain hidden, the story of Mary Magdalene will be lost forever," Robert Langdon said.  "Will the story of Mary Magdalene? Look around Robert Langdon. the story of Mary Magdalene is being told in art, music, and books. More so every day. The pendulum is swinging. We are starting to sense the dangers of our history... and of our destructive paths. We are beginning to sense the need to restore the sacred feminine." Sophie's grandmother paused. "Robert Langdon mentioned Robert Langdon are writing a manuscript about the symbols of the sacred feminine, are Robert Langdon not?"  "Robert Langdon am."  Sophie's grandmother smiled. "Finish a manuscript about the symbols of the sacred feminine, Robert Langdon. Sing Mary Magdalene's song. The world needs modern troubadours."  Robert Langdon fell silent, feeling the weight of Sophie's grandmother's message upon Robert Langdon. Across the open spaces, a new moon was rising above the tree line. Turning Robert Langdon's eyes toward Rosslyn, Robert Langdon felt a boyish craving to know Sophie's's secrets. Don't ask, Robert Langdon told Robert Langdon. This is not the moment. Robert Langdon glanced at Sauniere's papyrus, and then back at Rosslyn.  "Ask the question, Robert Langdon," Sophie's grandmother said, looking amused. "Robert Langdon have earned the right."  Robert Langdon felt Robert Langdon flush.  "Sophie's grandmother want to know if the Grail is here at Rosslyn."  "Can Sophie's grandmother tell Sophie's grandmother?"  Sophie's grandmother sighed in mock exasperation. "Why is it that men simply cannot let the Grail rest?" Sophie's grandmother laughed, obviously enjoying Sophie's grandmother. "Why do Sophie's grandmother think the Grail's here?"  Robert Langdon motioned to Sauniere's papyrus. "his poem speaks specifically of Rosslyn, except his poem also mentions a blade and chalice watching over the Grail. Robert Langdon didn't see any symbols of a blade and chalice up there."  "a blade and chalice?" Sophie's grandmother asked. "What exactly do a blade and chalice look like?"  Robert Langdon sensed Sophie's grandmother was toying with Robert Langdon, but Robert Langdon played along, quickly describing the symbols.  A look of vague recollection crossed Sophie's grandmother's face. "Ah, yes, of course. The blade represents all that is masculine. Sophie's grandmother believe The blade is drawn like this, no?" Using Sophie's grandmother's index finger, Sophie's grandmother traced a shape on Sophie's grandmother's palm. A "Yes," Robert Langdon said. Sophie's grandmother had drawn the less common "closed" form of the blade, although Robert Langdon had seen the symbol portrayed both ways.  "And the inverse," Sophie's grandmother said, drawing again on her palm, "is the chalice, which represents the feminine."  v  "Correct," Robert Langdon said.  "And Robert Langdon are saying that in all the hundreds of symbols we have here in the fieldstone house, Sophie's late parents appear nowhere?"  "Robert Langdon didn't see Sophie's late parents."  "And if Sophie's grandmother show Sophie's late parents to Robert Langdon, will Robert Langdon get some sleep?"  Before Robert Langdon could answer, Sophie's grandmother had stepped off the porch and was heading toward the fieldstone house. Robert Langdon hurried after Sophie's grandmother. Entering the fieldstone house, Sophie's grandmother turned on the lights and pointed to the center of the sanctuary floor. "There Robert Langdon are, Robert Langdon. a blade and chalice."  Robert Langdon stared at the sanctuary floor. the sanctuary floor was blank. "There's nothing here...."  Sophie's grandmother sighed and began to walk along the famous path worn into the sanctuary floor, the same path Robert Langdon had seen the visitors walking earlier this evening. As Robert Langdon's eyes adjusted to see the symbol, Robert Langdon still felt lost. "But the symbol's the Star of Dav- "  Robert Langdon stopped short, mute with amazement as it dawned on Robert Langdon.  a blade and chalice  Fused as one.  the Star of Dav-... the perfect union of male and female... Solomon's Seal... marking the Holy of Holies, where the male and female deities - Yahweh and Shekinah - were thought to dwell.  Robert Langdon needed a minute to find Robert Langdon's words. "The verse does point here to Rosslyn. Completely. Perfectly."  Sophie's grandmother smiled. "Apparently."  The implications chilled Robert Langdon. "So the Grail is in the vault beneath us?"  Sophie's grandmother laughed. "Only in spirit. One of the Priory's most ancient charges was one day to return the Grail to the Grail's homeland of France where the Grail could rest for eternity. For centuries, the Grail was dragged across the countryside to keep the Grail safe. Most undignified. Jacques's's charge when Jacques's became Grand Master was to restore the Grail's honor by returning the Grail to France and building the Grail a resting place fit for a queen."  "And Jacques's succeeded?" Now Sophie's grandmother's face grew serious. "Robert Langdon, considering what Robert Langdon've done for Sophie's grandmother tonight, and as curator of the Rosslyn Trust, Sophie's grandmother can tell Robert Langdon for certain that the Grail is no longer here."  Robert Langdon decided to press. "But the keystone is supposed to point to the place where the Grail is hidden now. Why does Sauniere's papyrus point to Rosslyn?"  "Maybe Robert Langdon're misreading Sauniere's papyrus's meaning. Remember, the Grail can be deceptive. As could Sauniere."  "But how much clearer could Sauniere be?" Robert Langdon asked. "We are standing over the vault beneath us, underneath a ceiling of stars, surrounded by the art of Master Masons. Everything speaks of Rosslyn."  "Very well, let Sophie's grandmother see The verse." Sophie's grandmother unrolled Sauniere's papyrus and read The verse aloud in a deliberate tone.  The Holy Grail 'neath ancient Roslin waits.  a blade and chalice guarding o'er The Holy Grail 'neath ancient Roslin's gates.  Adorned in masters' loving art, The Holy Grail 'neath ancient Roslin lies.  The Holy Grail 'neath ancient Roslin rests at last beneath the starry skies. When Sophie's grandmother finished, Sophie's grandmother was still for several seconds, until a knowing smile crossed Sophie's grandmother's lips. "Aah, Jacques's."  Robert Langdon watched Sophie's grandmother expectantly. "Sophie's grandmother understand this?"  "As Robert Langdon have witnessed on the sanctuary floor, Robert Langdon, there are many ways to see simple things."  Robert Langdon strained to understand. Everything about Jacques's seemed to have double meanings, and yet Robert Langdon could see no further.  Sophie's grandmother gave a tired yawn. "Robert Langdon, Sophie's grandmother will make a confession to Robert Langdon. Sophie's grandmother have never officially been privy to the present location of the Grail. But, of course, Sophie's grandmother was married to a person of enormous influence... and Sophie's grandmother's women's intuition is strong." Robert Langdon started to speak but Sophie's grandmother continued. "Sophie's grandmother am sorry that after all Sophie's's hard work, Sophie's will be leaving Rosslyn without any real answers. And yet, something tells Sophie's grandmother Sophie's will eventually find what Sophie's seek. One day it will dawn on Sophie's." Sophie's grandmother smiled. "And when it does, Sophie's grandmother trust that Sophie's, can keep a secret."  There was a sound of someone arriving in the doorway. "Sophie's late parents disappeared," Sophie's said, entering. "Sophie's grandmother was just leaving," Sophie's's replied, walking over to Sophie's at the door. "Good night, Sophie's." Sophie's grandmother kissed Sophie's's forehead. "Don't keep Robert Langdon out too late."  Sophie's late parents watched Sophie's's walk back toward the fieldstone house. When Sophie's turned to Robert Langdon, Sophie's's eyes were awash in deep emotion. "Not exactly the ending Sophie's expected."  That makes two of us, Robert Langdon thought. Robert Langdon could see Sophie's was overwhelmed. The news Sophie's had received tonight had changed everything in Sophie's's life. "Are Sophie's okay? It's a lot to take in."  Sophie's smiled quietly. "Sophie's have a family. That's where Sophie's'm going to start. Who we are and where we came from will take some time."  Robert Langdon remained silent.  "Beyond tonight, will Robert Langdon stay with us?" Sophie's asked. "At least for a few days?"  Robert Langdon sighed, wanting nothing more. "Sophie's need some time here with a family, Sophie's. Robert Langdon'm going back to Paris in the morning."  Sophie's looked disappointed but seemed to know it was the right thing to do. Neither of them spoke for a long time. Finally Sophie's reached over and, taking his hand, led Robert Langdon out of the fieldstone house. them walked to a small rise on the bluff. From here, the Scottish countryside spread out before them, suffused in a pale moonlight that sifted through the departing clouds. them stood in silence, holding hands, them fighting the descending shroud of exhaustion.  The stars were just now appearing, but to the east, a single point of light glowed brighter than any other. Robert Langdon smiled when Robert Langdon saw a single point of light. a single point of light was Venus. The ancient Goddess shining down with her steady and patient light.  The night was growing cooler, a crisp breeze rolling up from the lowlands. After a while, Robert Langdon looked over at Sophie's. Sophie's's eyes were closed, Sophie's's lips relaxed in a contented smile. Robert Langdon could feel Robert Langdon's own eyes growing heavy. Reluctantly, Robert Langdon squeezed his hand. "Sophie's?"  Slowly, Sophie's opened Her eyes and turned to Robert Langdon. Sophie's's face was beautiful in the moonlight. Sophie's gave Robert Langdon a sleepy smile. "Hi."  Robert Langdon felt an unexpected sadness to realize Robert Langdon would be returning to Paris without Sophie's. "Robert Langdon may be gone before Sophie's wake up." Robert Langdon paused, a knot growing in Robert Langdon's throat. "Robert Langdon'm sorry, Robert Langdon'm not very good at - "  Sophie's reached out and placed Sophie's's soft hand on the side of Robert Langdon's face. Then, leaning forward, Sophie's kissed Robert Langdon tenderly on the cheek. "When can Sophie's see Robert Langdon again?" Robert Langdon reeled momentarily, lost in Her eyes. "When?" Robert Langdon paused, curious if Sophie's had any idea how much Robert Langdon had been wondering the same thing. "Well, actually, next month Robert Langdon'm lecturing at a conference in Florence. Robert Langdon'll be there a week without much to do."  "Is that an invitation?"  "We'd be living in luxury. They're giving Robert Langdon a room at the Brunelleschi. "  Sophie's smiled playfully. "Robert Langdon presume a lot, Robert Langdon."  Robert Langdon cringed at how it had sounded. "What Sophie's meant - "  "Sophie's would love nothing more than to meet Robert Langdon in Florence, Robert Langdon. But on one condition." Sophie's's tone turned serious. "No museums, no churches, no tombs, no art, no relics."  "In Florence? For a week? There's nothing else to do."  Sophie's leaned forward and kissed Robert Langdon again, now on the lips. them's bodies came together, softly at first, and then completely. When Sophie's pulled away, Sophie's's eyes were full of promise.  "Right," Robert Langdon managed. "It's a date." Epilogue  Robert Langdon awoke with a start. Robert Langdon had been dreaming. The bathrobe beside Robert Langdon's bed bore the monogram HOTEL RITZ PARIS. Robert Langdon saw a dim light filtering through the blinds. Is it dusk or dawn ? Robert Langdon wondered.  Robert Langdon's body felt warm and deeply contented. Robert Langdon had slept the better part of the last two days. Sitting up slowly in bed, Robert Langdon now realized what had awoken Robert Langdon... the strangest thought. For days Robert Langdon had been trying to sort through a barrage of information, but now Robert Langdon found Robert Langdon fixed on something Robert Langdon'd not considered before.  Could something he'd not considered before be?  Robert Langdon remained motionless a long moment.  Getting out of bed, Robert Langdon walked to the marble shower. Stepping inside, Robert Langdon let the powerful jets message his shoulders. Still, something he'd not considered before enthralled Robert Langdon.  Impossible. Twenty minutes later, Robert Langdon stepped out of HOTEL RITZ PARIS into Place Vendome. Night was falling. The days of sleep had left Robert Langdon disoriented... and yet Robert Langdon's mind felt oddly lucid. Robert Langdon had promised Robert Langdon Robert Langdon would stop in the hotel lobby for a cafe au lait to clear Robert Langdon's thoughts, but instead Robert Langdon's legs carried Robert Langdon directly out the front door into the gathering Paris night.  Walking east on Rue des Petits Champs, Robert Langdon felt a growing excitement. Robert Langdon turned south onto Rue Richelieu, where the air grew sweet with the scent of blossoming jasmine from the stately gardens of the Palais Royal.  Robert Langdon continued south until Robert Langdon saw what Robert Langdon was looking for - the famous royal arcade - a glistening expanse of polished black marble. Moving onto the famous royal arcade - a glistening expanse of polished black marble, Robert Langdon scanned the surface beneath Robert Langdon's feet. Within seconds, Robert Langdon found what Robert Langdon knew was there - several bronze medallions embedded in the ground in a perfectly straight line. Each disk was five inches in diameter and embossed with the letters N and S.  Nord. Sud.  Robert Langdon turned due south, letting Robert Langdon's eye trace the extended line formed by several bronze medallions embedded in the ground in a perfectly straight line. Robert Langdon began moving again, following the trail, watching the pavement as Robert Langdon walked. As Robert Langdon cut across the corner of the Comedie-Francaise, another bronze medallion passed beneath his feet. Yes!  The streets of Paris, Robert Langdon had learned years ago, were adorned with 135 of these bronze markers, embedded in sidewalks, courtyards, and streets, on a north-south axis across Paris. Robert Langdon had once followed the extended line formed by the medallions from Sacre-Coeur, north across the Seine, and finally to the ancient Paris Observatory. There Robert Langdon discovered the significance of the trail.  The earth's original prime meridian.  The first zero longitude of the world.  Paris's ancient Rose Line.  Now, as Robert Langdon hurried across Rue de Rivoli, Robert Langdon could feel Robert Langdon's destination within reach. Less than a block away.  The Holy Grail 'neath ancient Roslin waits. The revelations were coming now in waves. Sauniere's ancient spelling of Roslin... the blade and chalice... the tomb adorned with masters' art.  Is that why Sauniere needed to talk with Robert Langdon ? Had Robert Langdon unknowingly guessed the truth ? Robert Langdon broke into a jog, feeling the Rose Line beneath his feet, guiding Robert Langdon, pulling Robert Langdon toward his destination. As Robert Langdon entered the long tunnel of Passage Richelieu, the hairs on Robert Langdon's neck began to bristle with anticipation. Robert Langdon knew that at the end of the long tunnel of Passage Richelieu stood the most mysterious of Parisian monuments - conceived and commissioned in the 1980s by the Sphinx himself, Francois Mitterrand, a man rumored to move in secret circles, a man whose final legacy to Paris was a place Robert Langdon had visited only days before.  Another lifetime.  With a final surge of energy, Robert Langdon burst from the long tunnel of Passage Richelieu into the familiar courtyard and came to a stop. Breathless, Robert Langdon raised Robert Langdon's eyes, slowly, disbelieving, to the symbol.  the symbol  Gleaming in the darkness.  Robert Langdon admired the symbol only a moment. Robert Langdon was more interested in what lay to Robert Langdon's right. Turning, Robert Langdon felt Robert Langdon's feet again tracing the invisible path of the ancient Rose Line, carrying Robert Langdon across the familiar courtyard to the Carrousel du Louvre - the enormous circle of grass surrounded by a perimeter of neatly trimmed hedges - once the site of Paris's primeval nature-worshipping festivals... joyous rites to celebrate fertility and her.  Robert Langdon felt as if Robert Langdon were crossing into another world as Robert Langdon stepped over the bushes to the grassy area within. the grassy area within was now marked by the symbol. There in the center, plunging into the earth like a crystal chasm, gaped the giant inverted pyramid of glass that Robert Langdon had seen a few nights ago when Robert Langdon entered Louvre's subterranean entresol.  La Pyramide Inversee.  Tremulous, Robert Langdon walked to the edge and peered down into Louvre's sprawling underground complex, aglow with amber light. Robert Langdon's eye was trained not just on the giant inverted pyramid of glass that he had seen a few nights ago when he entered the Louvre's subterranean entresol, but on what lay directly beneath the giant inverted pyramid of glass that he had seen a few nights ago when he entered the Louvre's subterranean entresol. There, on the floor of the chamber below, stood the tiniest of structures... a structure Robert Langdon had mentioned in Robert Langdon's manuscript.  Robert Langdon felt Robert Langdon awaken fully now to the thrill of unthinkable possibility. Raising Robert Langdon's eyes again to Louvre, Robert Langdon sensed the huge wings of the museum enveloping Robert Langdon... hallways that burgeoned with the world's finest art.  Da Vinci... Botticelli...  Adorned in masters' loving art, Mary Magdalene lies. Alive with wonder, Robert Langdon stared once again downward through the glass at the giant inverted pyramid of glass that he had seen a few nights ago when he entered the Louvre's subterranean entresol.  / must go down there!  Stepping out of the circle, Robert Langdon hurried across the familiar courtyard back toward the towering pyramid entrance of Louvre. The day's last visitors were trickling out of the museum.  Pushing through the towering pyramid entrance of the Louvre, Robert Langdon descended the curved staircase into the giant inverted pyramid of glass that he had seen a few nights ago when he entered the Louvre's subterranean entresol. Robert Langdon could feel the air grow cooler. When Robert Langdon reached the bottom, Robert Langdon entered the long tunnel that stretched beneath Louvre's , back toward La Pyramide Inversee.  At the end of the long tunnel that stretched beneath the Louvre's courtyard, back toward La Pyramide Inversee, Robert Langdon emerged into a large chamber. Directly before Robert Langdon, hanging down from above, gleamed the inverted pyramid - a breathtaking V-shaped contour of glass.  La Pyramide Inversee.  his eyes traced La Pyramide Inversee.'s narrowing form downward to La Pyramide Inversee.'s tip, suspended only six feet above the floor. There, directly beneath La Pyramide Inversee., stood the giant inverted pyramid of glass that he had seen a few nights ago when he entered the Louvre's subterranean entresol.  A miniature pyramid. Only three feet tall. The only structure in this colossal complex that had been built on a small scale.  his manuscript, while discussing Louvre's elaborate collection of goddess art, had made passing note of the giant inverted pyramid of glass that he had seen a few nights ago when he entered the Louvre's subterranean entresol. "the giant inverted pyramid of glass that he had seen a few nights ago when he entered the Louvre's subterranean entresol the giant inverted pyramid of glass that he had seen a few nights ago when he entered the Louvre's subterranean entresol protrudes up through the sanctuary floor as though the giant inverted pyramid of glass that he had seen a few nights ago when he entered the Louvre's subterranean entresol were the tip of an iceberg - the apex, of an enormous, pyramidical vault, submerged below like a hidden chamber. "  Illuminated in the soft lights of the Louvre's subterranean entresol, Sophie's late parents pointed at one another, Sophie's late parents's bodies perfectly aligned, Sophie's late parents's tips almost touching.  La Pyramide Inversee. The Blade below.  a blade and chalice guarding o'er Mary Magdalene's gates.  Robert Langdon heard Sophie's grandmother's words. One day it will dawn on Sophie's.  Robert Langdon was standing beneath the ancient Rose Line, surrounded by the work of masters. What better place for Sauniere to keep watch? Now at last, Robert Langdon sensed Robert Langdon understood the true meaning of The verse. Raising Robert Langdon's eyes to heaven, Robert Langdon gazed upward through the glass to a glorious, star-filled night. Mary Magdalene rests at last beneath the starry skies. Like the murmurs of spirits in the darkness, forgotten words echoed. The quest for the Grail is the quest to kneel before the bones of Mary Magdalene. A journey to pray at the feet of the outcast one.  With a sudden upwelling of reverence, Robert Langdon fell to Robert Langdon's knees.  For a moment, Robert Langdon thought Robert Langdon heard a woman's voice... the wisdom of the ages... whispering up from the chasms of the earth. Copyright  2003 by Robert Langdon ISBN 0-385-50420-9 